 The Journal of Supercomputing (2023) 79:3277–3297
 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11227-022-04710-1




 An effective hybrid genetic algorithm and tabu search
 for maximizing network lifetime using coverage sets
 scheduling in wireless sensor networks

 Nemat allah Mottaki1 · Homayun Motameni1 · Hosein Mohamadi2

 Accepted: 6 July 2022 / Published online: 1 September 2022
 © The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature
 2022



 Abstract
 Two important issues in Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) are coverage and net-
 work lifetime. Network operation in an environment can be divided into two phases,
 first, making coverage sets and then scheduling them. The preliminary reviews have
 provided a number of solutions for problem-solving in the first phase, but there is
 no enough solution provided for the second one. Once the number of sensors in the
 environment increases, the number of coverage sets as well as the number of order
 sequences (in which the coverage sets can be scheduled) will also increase. The
 present study aims to detect a near-optimal scheduling for coverage sets to prolong
 the network lifetime. This problem was previously introduced as MCSS (Maximum
 Coverage Sets Scheduling) and it was proved to be an NP-hard problem. This paper
 presents two algorithms, a Genetic Algorithm (GA) and a Hybrid Algorithm (HA)
 integrating GA and Tabu Search (TS) to solve the MCSS problem. To reveal its effi-
 ciency, the algorithms were compared with a recently proposed algorithm in terms
 of scheduling the coverage sets. The simulations performed in this study showed
 that the proposed algorithms were more successful in finding near-optimal schedul-
 ing coverage sets.

 Keywords Directional sensor networks · Genetic algorithm · Tabu search · Coverage
 set scheduling




 * Homayun Motameni
   motameni@iausari.ac.ir
 1
     Department of Computer Engineering, Sari Branch, Islamic Azad University, Sari, Iran
 2
     Department of Computer Engineering, Azadshar Branch, Islamic Azad University, Azadshar,
     Iran


                                                                                                 1  3
                                                                                         Vol.:(0123456789)

Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 3278                                                                   N. a. Mottaki et al.


 1 Introduction

 Wireless sensor network (WSN) is one of the most important technologies
 employed extensively during the last two decades. WSNs have been applied
 recently to other applications such as internet of things and home automation [1].
 A WSN is composed of a large number of multi functional sensors that are small
 in size, each of which equipped with a small radio controller, a transmitter, and
 a receiver. WSNs are applied to battlefield security monitoring, wildlife habitat
 monitoring, etc. [2]. Sensors are generally divided into two categories according
 to their application, omnidirectional and directional sensors. In omnidirectional,
 sensors are able to sense a full 360-degree view of their surroundings and can
 cover targets simultaneously in all directions. A directional sensor can perform its
 monitoring task in several directions; however, it can only be active in one direc-
 tion and at a given angle within a defined time unit. Directional sensors basically
 involve the ultrasonic, infrared, and video sensors [3].
    Coverage is considered a major problem in directional sensor networks (DSNs)
 and is a criterion for quality of service, which means that how any point or area
 in a network is monitored by a sensor [4]. Based on sensor networks, coverage is
 categorized into three groups: target coverage, area coverage, and barrier cover-
 age [5]. In cases where the sensors monitor some targets or points defined in an
 area, it is called target coverage [6]. While, area coverage refers to the situations
 where sensors cover an entire area regardless of a definite point [7]. Barrier cov-
 erage, on the other hand, creates a barrier using a chain of sensors and minimizes
 the possibility of intrusion into the environment in which the sensor network is
 active [8].
    Another major problem in sensor networks is to prolong the network life-
 time [9]. Energy consumption management in sensors is of great importance
 because it is almost impossible to recharge or replace the sensors batteries [10].
 The lifetime of a DSN is the time period during which the network can operate
 properly, from the time the network is set up until the time it fails to meet certain
 coverage requirements [11]. Sensor scheduling is one of the techniques proposed
 in the literature for energy consumption management [12]. This technique divides
 the sensors into a number of coverage sets each of which can meet the network
 coverage requirement. Two types of coverage sets can be formed: disjoint and
 non-disjoint. In the former, each sensor is a member of only one coverage set that
 do not share the sensors. On the other hand, the latter contains sensors that can
 participate in several coverage sets sharing a number of sensors with each other.
 When a coverage set is implemented within a given time period, the rest switch
 to inactive mode. When a coverage set is inactive, its associated sensors also
 switch to inactive mode. The activity time of each sensor can be scheduled so
 efficiently and practically that the network lifetime could be prolonged as much as
 possible [6].
    The current paper presents a GA-based algorithm and a hybrid GA-TS algo-
 rithm to achieve a near optimal scheduling for coverage sets. GA is a search
 algorithm based on natural selection and natural genetics. In GA, instead of a


 13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 An effective hybrid genetic algorithm and tabu search for…                                            3279


 point, a population of points is searched. The solution to a problem in the GA is
 encoded with a chromosome. Several operations such as reproduction, crossover
 and mutation, the chromosome which is fitter than the others get better chance to
 reproduce. Tabu Search (TS) is a neighborhood-based local exploration approach,
 which examines solution space by continuously replacing the recent solution with
 the best unvisited neighbor solution. As mentioned earlier, the algorithm uses the
 global search ability of GA as well as the local search ability of TS to achieve the
 optimal or near-optimal solution. The algorithms proposed in this paper can be
 applied to both WSNs‌and DSNs, but here the DSNs is considered.

 1.1 Necessity of coverage set scheduling in sensor networks

 To provide better understanding of the effectiveness of sensor scheduling technique
 in prolonging the DSNs lifetime, an example is illustrated in Fig. 1.




 Fig. 1  Directional sensors and targets distributed in environment, and 3 coverage sets that can be created
 through them


                                                                                               13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 3280                                                                                        N. a. Mottaki et al.


     Suppose an environment in which 5 sensors (s1 , s2 , s3 , s4 , s5) with 4 targets
 (t1 , t2 , t3 , t4) are randomly distributed and each sensor’s lifetime is equal to h. Each
 sensor covers a number of targets in this environment (for example, si,j indicates that
 sensor i covers a target using sector j). When all sensors simultaneously switch to
 active mode, the maximum lifetime of the network will be equal to the lifetime of
 one sensor (in this example, it is equal to h).
     To achieve the advantages of the sensor scheduling method, it is assumed that
 the sensors are categorized into three non-disjoint coverage sets (See Fig. 1). The
 coverage sets c1 = (s1,1 , s4,3 , s2,3 , s3,1), c2 = (s1,2 , s2,3 , s5,2) and c3 = (s2,1 , s1,3 , s4,3 , s5,2),
 can be created, each of which is allowed to be active for 0.5 h. By activating each
 coverage set, the energy of its sensors will decrease. Coverage sets also have some
 sensors in common. As illustrated by this example, the network lifetime is increased
 to 1.5 h by activating the coverage sets constantly, assuming that the sensor’s energy
 consumption is insignificant in inactive mode.
     As mentioned before, inside an environment, the activity of network is combined
 of two phases: creation of covering sets and their scheduling [11]. The initial exami-
 nation have provisioned numerous solutions for the phase 1, however, not conveni-
 ently enough results for the phase 2. It must be noted that as the sensors’ number
 increases, so do the quantities of the covering sets and order sequences, wherein the
 volume of the scheduled covering sets will be enlarged, too. The number of strate-
 gies based on which the coverage sets can be scheduled successively is characterized
 as a permutation. The permutation of a set is to arrange its members into a sequence
 or linear order, or just to rearrange them if the members are already in a sequence.
 Consequently, the number of permutations of a set with n elements is n! [13]. For
 example, if there is a network with three coverage sets (a, b, c); then, six different
 sequences, namely (a, b, c), (a, c, b), (b, a, c), (b, c, a), (c, a, b), and(c, b, a) can be
 regarded for scheduling them. The problem of optimizing the coverage sets schedul-
 ing, called Maximum Coverage Sets Scheduling (MCSS), was first raised in [11],
 which aimed to prolong the network lifetime.


 1.2 Our contribution and organization of the paper

 In a sensor network with a large number of sensors, more coverage sets could be
 built. How to schedule coverage sets and the order of execution can have a great
 impact on the network lifetime. In this paper, the main objective is to find near-opti-
 mal scheduling coverage sets. The present study proposes two algorithms to find the
 scheduling strategy of coverage sets. In the first, a GA-based algorithm is proposed
 to find coverage set scheduling. In the second algorithm, a hybrid GA-TS algorithm
 is developed. In this algorithm, the high global search ability of GA and the local
 search ability of TS are used to provide a high search capacity. Several simulations
 are performed on the algorithms, and the results are compared with those of an algo-
 rithm presented previously in the literature.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 briefly reviews the
 studies conducted on making coverage sets. Network model and problem definition
 are given in the Sect. 3. Section presents the algorithms. Section 5 provides the

 13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 An effective hybrid genetic algorithm and tabu search for…                         3281


 simulation results of the algorithm. Finally, Sect. 6 presents the research conclusion
 and further work.


 2 Related work

 A major technique for energy consumption management is to schedule the sensor
 activity into two states: sleep and active. This technique is intended to maximize
 coverage and the network lifetime. The problem is defined as the maximum cover-
 age with minimum sensors and it is an NP-Complete problem [14].
    The literature consists of some methods proposed to solve the scheduling sensors
 problem in directional networks. In [15], the directional cover and transmission in
 DSNs was introduced, which was intended to prolong the network lifetime, transmit
 the information, and solve the targets overlapping problem.
    In [16, 17], many attempts were made to solve the coverage problem in directional
 sensors. Two techniques, i.e., sensors scheduling and adjusting sensing range, were
 used to prolong the network lifetime. In [16], for the first time, the adjustable sens-
 ing ranges in DSNs were investigated. In this respect, two greedy algorithms were
 proposed to solve the problem. In [17], the problem of Maximum Network Life-
 time with Adjustable Ranges (MNLAR) was addressed and a target-oriented GA-
 based algorithm was presented to solve it. In [14], the coverage in the visual sensor
 networks was examined, in which the targets have different predetermined coverage
 requirement. In [3], an energy-aware method was proposed to cover all the targets
 in the network and also to extend the network lifetime. The authors used the multi-
 objective evolutionary algorithm method, recognizing that the scheduling of the sen-
 sors to solve the coverage problem is inherently a multi-objective problem. To solve
 a multi-objective problem, two parameters, i.e., the minimum number of sensors and
 the maximum target coverage, are defined. In [5], a method was proposed to solve
 the coverage problem in DSNs. The authors used GA and repair operator to select a
 set of sensors and solve the priority-based target coverage problem. In this method,
 each target initially has a different predetermined coverage requirement.
    In [18] the cuckoo search algorithm has been developed to find the maximum
 number of coverage sensors. In [19] a cuckoo search algorithm is developed to iden-
 tify the sensor coverage set by optimizing the sensing range to reduce the redun-
 dancy sensors in the network. The algorithm creates non-disjoint cover sets with
 variable sensing range so that each cover set provide k-coverage. In [20], the prob-
 lem of prolonging network lifetime was investigated as a bi-objective optimization
 problem. The authors consider the first objective to find the maximum coverage sets
 and the second objective to solve the problem of energy loss. Authors in [21] pro-
 pose a novel and energy efficient target coverage algorithm to identify disjoint and
 non-disjoint coverage sets. the developed algorithm identifies coverage sets to cover
 the targets and gives the optimal minimum energy paths from the cover set to the
 sink and the sink to the sensor node.
    In [11] the authors proved that coverage set scheduling is an NP-hard problem,
 and also they formulated the MCSS problem by ILP. In addition, the Greedy-MCSS
 was proposed to solve the coverage sets scheduling problem and an approximation

                                                                             13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 3282                                                                            N. a. Mottaki et al.


 algorithm, called MCSSA, was proposed based on this method. After simulation,
 the superiority of MCSSA method over Greedy-MCSS was proved, and the MCSSA
 algorithm was ultimately implemented under different conditions. Although the
 methods proposed in [11] will result in achieving some solutions, such solutions
 are inherently problematic. A lot of computational complexities can be found in the
 Integer Linear Programming (ILP) method used for solving large-scale problems,
 and it is not an efficient solution to such problems. Due to the fact that the greedy-
 based solution methods are used in solving many optimization problems, they may
 be caught into the local minimum depending on the problem conditions, and conse-
 quently, they will not achieve the global optima [22, 23].


 3 Network model and problem definition

 This paper follows the scenario presented below. The directional sensors and tar-
 gets are distributed randomly and uniformly at given spots in an Euclidean envi-
 ronment. Targets and sensors are aware of their locations. The energy level of each
 sensor is equal to bi , and a negligible amount of energy is consumed to change the
 sector. Each sensor is in one of the two modes: active or sleep. It is supposed that
 a group of coverage sets (C) is made for the scheduling sensors, C=(c1 , c2 , ..., ck ).
 In this group, each ck is a non-disjoint coverage set and it can meet the network
 requirements during a given period by itself. If the period in which the ck coverage
 set can be activated in a sequence regarding the energy of its sensors is equal to tk ,
 and T=(t1 , t2 , ..., tk ), a coverage set scheduling strategy should be found in a way to
 satisfy Eq. (1):
                                                          k
                                                          ∑
                            Maximize(Tnetworklifetime =         ti )                              (1)
                                                          i=1

 Table 1 gives the parameters used in this paper.
   Problem : How to find the optimal or near-optimal schedule of coverage sets in a
 way to maximize the network lifetime by activating it.



 Table 1  Notations             Notations                              Definition

                                n                                      Number of sensors
                                m                                      Number of targets
                                C                                      Set of coverage sets
                               si                                      The ith sensor 1 ≤ i ≤ n
                                S                                      Set of sensors {s1 , s2 ,...sn}
                                T                                      Set of targets {t, t2 ,...tm }
                               d i, j                                  jth direction of ith sensor
                               ck                                      kth coverage set
                               bi                                      Energy level of ith sensor



 13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 An effective hybrid genetic algorithm and tabu search for…                                   3283


      In the following, an example is presented to illustrate the problem: There are
 seven sensors S = ( s1 , s2 , ..., s7 ) with energy levels of b = (4, 3, 5, 5, 5, 2, 3) in an
 environment. It is assumed that three non-disjoint coverage sets are created as
 c1 = (s1 , s2 , s5 ), c2 = (s3 , s4 , s5 ), c3 = (s6 , s7 , s3 , s1 ). According to the definition
 of permutation, it is possible to obtain six different implementation sequences
 through these three coverage sets. Moreover, the assumption is that the activity
 time of each sensor is equal to the energy level of the sensor. Accordingly, Table 2
 presents the total network lifetime while scheduling the six possible strategies.
      In Table 2, each of the two coverage schedules of c3 , c2 , c1 andc3 , c1 , c2 can
 be accepted as the final answer. For a better understanding, consider schedule
 c3 , c2 , c1. The first coverage set consists of sensors s6 , s7 , s3, and s1. When this cov-
 erage set is used to cover the targets in the network, it can cover the targets up
 to 2 (energy level of s6 ). After this, because the energy of sensor s6 is exhausted,
 this coverage set is no longer able to cover all the targets, the energy of all the
 sensors in this coverage set is reduced and the remaining energy of the sensors in
 this coverage set is updated. the new energy levels of the sensors in the coverage
 set becomes (0, 1, 3, 2). The next coverage set to run in this schedule is c2 . In this
 coverage set, there are sensors s3 , s3, and s5. This coverage set runs as long as the
 energy level of s3, and when the sensor runs out of power, the coverage set no
 longer covers all the targets in the network. After destroying sensor s3, the new
 energy levels of the sensors is updated, and the new energy levels of the sensors
 in coverage set becomes (0, 2, 2). Finally, coverage set c1 is running with sensors
 s1 , s2 , and s5. The new energy level of the sensors becomes (0, 1, 0). The sum of
 the lifetime that all 3 coverage sets in the network could be executed is 7. The
 way of calculating the scheduling lifetime of ( c3 c2 c1) is illustrated in Fig. 2.



 4 Proposed algorithms

 The section starts with a general review of the GA; after that, it introduces two
 scheduling solutions proposed in this study to solve the coverage scheduling
 problem in DSNs.



 Table 2  Cover sets scheduling      Coverage sets scheduling                           Total
 strategy                                                                               network
                                                                                        lifetime

                                     𝐜1 𝐜2 𝐜3                                           6
                                     𝐜1 𝐜3 𝐜2                                           6
                                     𝐜2 𝐜1 𝐜3                                           5
                                     𝐜2 𝐜3 𝐜1                                           5
                                     𝐜3 𝐜1 𝐜2                                           7
                                     𝐜3 𝐜2 𝐜1                                           7



                                                                                       13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 3284                                                                   N. a. Mottaki et al.




 Fig. 2  Method of calculating the lifetime of the coverage sets




 4.1 Overview of the genetic algorithm

 GA is able to solve optimization problems through modelling the natural evolu-
 tion principles. At the initial step, the algorithm generates a population of pos-
 sible solutions each of which is denoted by a set of genes (also known as chro-
 mosome or individuals). A fitness function is defined for each certain problem,
 which aims to examine each chromosome’s performance. A chromosome fitness
 is dependent on how well the chromosome performs the task defined in the pro-
 cess of solving the problem of interest. Following the generation of the initial
 population, the algorithm starts the execution of three key operators, i.e., selec-
 tion, crossover, and mutation. Through the selection operator, a set of possible
 solutions are selected by the algorithm from among the initial population. After-
 wards, two selected chromosomes, which are known as parents, are applied to the
 creation of two child chromosomes through the crossover operator. This opera-
 tor exchanges the genetic information between the parent chromosomes. Then,
 it is the time for the child chromosomes to execute the mutation operator, which
 is expected to result in the generation of a better solution. After the completion
 of his operation, the fitness function is implemented again in order to assess the
 child chromosomes. To do this, the chromosome’s values are compared to values
 of all the chromosomes belonging to previous generation. Finally, from among
 the initial population and the population produced by the crossover and mutation
 operators, the individuals that hold greater fitness values are selected to be trans-
 ferred to the next generation [24].


 13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 An effective hybrid genetic algorithm and tabu search for…                      3285


 4.2 GA‑base algorithm

 In this section, the details of GA-based algorithm is explained.
    Representation and the initial population The way of modeling the chro-
 mosome to solve the problem is considered as a major part of the problem solv-
 ing process in GA. The present study uses an order representation to model a
 chromosome as a solution to the problem space. Each gene on the chromosome
 represents a coverage set, and each chromosome in this model is an indicative of
 a scheduling of coverage sets. Each chromosome is a solution to a problem. The
 assumption is that there are n coverage sets, according to the permutation defini-
 tion, there will be n! different orders. The initial population in this problem is a
 subset of all possible coverage sets sequence orders (n!). For example, if 5 cover-
 age sets with labels 1–5 are considered, one chromosome of this model is shown
 in Fig. 3.
    Fitness function: The fitness value obtained by the fitness function is applied
 to evaluating the quality of a chromosome. Each sensor si in a coverage set has
 an energy level denoted by bi . Due to the fact that if even one sensor in cover-
 age set runs out of power, it cannot meet the network requirements, the lifetime
 of a coverage set is measured based on the activity time of the sensor with the
 least energy in the coverage set. In this study, the value of the objective function
 is equal to the sum of the lifetime of the coverage sets that can be implemented
 spatially on a chromosome. It is worth mentioning that after activating each cov-
 erage set, a number of sensors are destroyed due to the discharge of batteries in
 the network, and the energy levels of a number of sensors change as well. Once a
 coverage set is activated in a chromosome, the lifetime of the remaining coverage
 sets of the chromosome changes with a new level of sensor energy; thus, it must
 be recalculated.
    Selection: This operator is used to detect two parents and generate the off-
 springs. This study uses the binary tournament selection method, based on which
 two chromosomes are randomly and uniformly selected from among the current
 population. The most appropriate chromosome is selected as a parent with regard
 to the fitness value. The same process is repeated to select the second parent.
    Crossover: Crossover is the main operator of GA and, similar to its coun-
 terpart in nature, it generates new members whose genes are formed from their
 parents. Depending on the problem nature, there are various methods proposed
 for crossover in GA. This study uses the order-based chromosomes; it is not
 suitable to use classical crossover operators such as one-point, two-point, and
 uniform crossovers. For order-based chromosomes, there are some crossover


 Fig. 3  Method of calculating the
 lifetime of the coverage sets




                                                                          13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 3286                                                                    N. a. Mottaki et al.


 operators as follow: Partially-Mapped Crossover Operator(PMX), Order Cross-
 over Operator(OX), Cycle Crossover Operator(CX) [25]. This research uses the
 CX2 method recently presented in [25]; its superiority over the methods PMX,
 OX and CX has been proven.
    Mutation: It is a random process through which a gene content is replaced by
 another to produce a new chromosome. In this study, the contents of two genes in a
 chromosome are randomly selected; then, their contents are replaced to perform the
 mutation operation.
    Stopping criterion: The stopping criterion of the proposed algorithm is met
 when it reaches a predetermined number of maximum iterations. In this case, an
 appropriate solution (a sequential order of coverage sets) is returned as the output of
 the algorithm. The proposed GA algorithm is described in algorithm 1.

  Algorithm 1 : A GA-based algorithm for coverage set scheduling
  01.   Input: Non-disjoint coverage sets in sensor network
  02.   Output: Near optimal coverage sets scheduling
  03.   SOL ← ∅
  04.   Initialize population (pop)
  05.   Fitness (pop)
  06.        k←0
  07.   While k ≤ M AX do
  08.     ps = Select (pop)
  09.     pc = Crossover (ps )
  10.     pm = M utation (pc )
  11.     pop = Survival (pc , pm , pop)
  12.     Fitness (pop)
  13.     k++
  14.   End While
  15.     SOL ← BEST (pop)
  16.   return SOL




 4.3 Hybrid GA‑TS algorithm

 The second algorithm presented in this paper is hybrid algorithm (HA), combining
 the GA and TS. Pure evolutionary algorithms are not suitable for precise search in
 complex hybrid spaces, and hybridization along with other techniques improve the
 efficiency of the search process. In general, GA detects the optimal region and then
 a local optimizer is performed to find the optimal solution. The combination of an
 evolutionary algorithm with a local search approach is referred to as HA [26]. To
 achieve the advantages of this approach, we develop a HA-based algorithm to solve
 the problem. The algorithm provides higher capacity in search by combining GA
 and TS, and it can effectively balance the intensification and diversification [27].
    Tabu Search (TS) is an optimization algorithm first introduced by Glover in
 1986 [28]. TS is based on a fundamental idea: the algorithm makes a list of move-
 ments or Tabu points, called tabu list, to prevent from doing those movements in
 the subsequent searches. This way, the algorithm desires to go beyond the local
 optimization and moves toward the global optimization. TS consists of two major

 13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 An effective hybrid genetic algorithm and tabu search for…                           3287


 elements: tabu list and aspiration criterion. The tabu list keeps a few recent move-
 ments and avoids selecting those movements as many times as possible. The time
 period during which the movements are on the tabu list is determined by a param-
 eter called tabu tenure. If a movement in the tabu list results in a better solution, it
 is selected based on a criterion called aspiration criterion, even though it is on the
 tabu list. After making a new selection and including in the tabu list, a number of
 movements that were previously on the tabu list are removed from the list [28].
    In proposed algorithm to improve the quality of chromosomes, a new func-
 tion is included in GA, which is applicable to all chromosomes in the current
 population. The TS optimization for all chromosomes is computationally expen-
 sive; therefore, it is not possible to apply it extensively. The method effectively
 regulates the GA convergence since TS usually improves the chromosomes in an
 effective way. Once the operation is done, if the stop criterion is not met, from
 among the initial population, the chromosomes that are more suitable are selected
 as the next offspring, and the population is generated through the operations of
 crossover, mutation and improvement. As evaluation progresses, GA seeks to
 drive the search toward the desired global value. The flowchart of proposed algo-
 rithm is described in Fig. 4. The steps of performing the TS algorithm are as
 follow:

 1. Generating an initial solution, evaluating it, and considering it as the best solution.
 2. Making a list of authorized operations (based on the adjacent generating meth-
    ods).
 3. Performing authorized and non-tabu operations (all or part of the operations) and
    obtaining solutions based on the objective function.




 Fig. 4  Flowchart of the proposed hybrid GA-TS algorithm


                                                                                13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 3288                                                                         N. a. Mottaki et al.


 4. Selecting the best solution from among those obtained in the previous step (if
    there is an operation in the tabu list that has obtained the best solution so far, the
    action will be selected by ignoring the tabu).
 5. Updating the tabu list (adding the selected operations to the tabu list and removing
    one or more operations from the tabu list), Updating the best solution found.
 6. If the stopping criterion is not met, returning to step 4.


 5 Simulation results

 To have an highly accurate evaluation, the effects of both the network parameters
 and the algorithm parameters over the network lifetime were examined. Each experi-
 ment was developed to examine the effect of a certain parameter on the network
 lifetime. The obtained results were compared with those of the MCSSA algorithm
 presented in [11]. In experiments, N sensors and T targets were randomly distributed
 within a 1000m ∗ 1000m square area. The sensing radius of all sensors was equal to
 R. Each sensor had an energy level equal to bi , which disappeared when the power
 is exhausted. A number of C coverage sets were randomly constructed to perform
 the experiments. The activity time of each coverage set depends on the energy of
 the sensors available in the coverage set. Given that a coverage set should meet the
 network requirement by itself, the network targets are not completely covered if even
 one sensor is lost in the coverage set. In such conditions, the coverage set can no
 longer be activated and its lifetime will expire. The proposed algorithm measures
 the network lifetime by scheduling coverage sets and calculates their activating time.
 In this paper, the result of each experiment is an average of 20 runs. The simulation
 parameters are listed in Table 3.
     The experiments were divided into two general categories. In the first category
 (Experiments 1–4), the impacts of network parameters on the proposed algorithms
 and MCSSA were investigated to evaluate their efficiency in prolonging the network
 lifetime. On the other hand, the second category (Experiments 5–8) examined the
 impacts of network parameters on the proposed algorithm, and coverage set sched-
 uling was evaluated under different conditions. The network parameters used in all



 Table 3  Simulation table     Simulation parameters

                               Monitored region                          1000m × 1000m
                               Number of directional sensors (S)         200–1200
                               Number of targets (T)                      5–30
                               Deployment                                 Random
                               Sensing radius (R)                         100–300
                               Comm. radius                               2 × Sensing radius
                               Working directions                         4
                               Active time slots of sensors               [0, 80]
                               Number of coverage sets (M)                10–80, 100–800



 13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 An effective hybrid genetic algorithm and tabu search for…                             3289


 experiments were the sensor activity time, number of coverage sets, number of tar-
 gets, number of sensors, and sensors’ sensing range.
    Experiment 1. This experiment was aimed at proving the hypothesis that the net-
 work lifetime will extend by increasing the active time slots of the sensors. As the
 coverage sets are made up of sensors, it is expected that increasing the activity time
 of the sensors will lead to increasing the coverage sets lifetime and the targets are
 covered longer by a coverage set. This experiment determined the impact of increas-
 ing the activity time of the sensors on the three algorithms. To perform the experi-
 ment, the sensors activity time during different performances was determined from
 [0, 10] to [50, 60] (note that [0, 10] is a random value within the range of 1–10), and
 the network parameters were set as T = 20, N = 100, M = 100, and R = 200. As
 indicated in Fig. 5, the proposed algorithms has a longer lifetime than the MCSSA
 algorithm for the same amount of activity time. The hybrid of GA and TS algo-
 rithms has better results than GA.
    Experiment 2. The second experiment was designed to prove the hypothesis
 that the network lifetime will prolong by increasing the number of coverage sets.
 In this regard, the number of coverage sets was uniformly increased from 10 to
 60 with incremental step of 10, the values of T = 10 , N = 300 , and R = 200 were
 set, and the activity time of the sensors was randomly selected within the range
 of 10–30. The results indicated that the network lifetime was not prolonged sig-
 nificantly by increasing the number of coverage sets. It can be explained by the
 fact that coverage sets have many sensors in common and consuming the sensors’
 energy will decrease the coverage sets lifetime, which also results in limiting the
 network lifetime. As it can be seen in Fig. 6, the proposed algorithms performed

                                     180
                                           MCSSA
                                     160   GA
                                           hybrid GA-TS
                                     140

                                     120




                  Network lifetime
                                     100

                                      80

                                      60

                                      40

                                      20

                                       0
                                           1       2       3       4        5      6
                                                The active time slots of sensors

 Fig. 5  Effect of the active time slots on the network lifetime


                                                                                       13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 3290                                                                               N. a. Mottaki et al.


                                     140
                                           MCSSA
                                           GA
                                     120   Hybrid GA-TS


                                     100




                  Network lifetime
                                      80


                                      60


                                      40


                                      20


                                       0
                                           10     20      30     40      50    60
                                                 The number of coverage sets

 Fig. 6  Effect of the number of coverage sets on the network lifetime



 better than the MCSSA algorithm in this regard. The results of the two proposed
 algorithms showed that the hybrid of the TS and GA algorithms contributed to
 finding better chromosomes and prolonging the network lifetime.
    Experiment 3. This experiment was carried out to compare the impacts of
 increasing the number of targets on three algorithms. To do this, the number
 of targets was increased from 5 to 30 units with incremental step of 5. To per-
 form the experiment, the values of N = 100 , M = 100 , and R = 200 were deter-
 mined and the energy value of each sensor was set to 10. More sensors should
 be included in a coverage set in order to cover new targets. Once each cover-
 age set was implemented, more sensors lost their energy and the network lifetime
 slowly decreased as the number of targets increased. As reported by the diagrams
 in Fig. 7, the proposed algorithms performed better than the MCSSA algorithm in
 terms of prolonging the network lifetime. The reason can be stated as follows: TS
 is able to overcome local minima by guiding the optimisation to new areas, and
 also it can reach the global optimum.
    Experiment 4. This experiment was aimed at determining the impact of
 increasing the number of sensors on the network lifetime. In this regard, the
 parameters of T = 20 , M = 100 , and R = 200 were determined, and the active
 time of each sensor was set to 10. Therefore, the number of sensors increased
 from 200 to 1200 with incremental step of 200. The network lifetime prolonged
 by increasing the number of sensors. Accordingly, the result is acceptable
 because each target was covered by more sensors and the number of shared sen-
 sors among different coverage sets decreased. The results of the implementation

 13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 An effective hybrid genetic algorithm and tabu search for…                                     3291


                                     100
                                                                                MCSSA
                                      90                                        GA
                                                                                Hybrid GA-TS
                                      80

                                      70




                  Network lifetime
                                      60

                                      50

                                      40

                                      30

                                      20

                                      10

                                       0
                                           5       10        15     20      25          30
                                                        The number of targets

 Fig. 7  Effect of the number of targets on the network lifetime




                                      40
                                           MCSSA
                                      35   GA
                                           Hybrid GA-TS

                                      30




                  Network lifetime
                                      25


                                      20


                                      15


                                      10


                                       5


                                       0
                                           200     400      600     800    1000       1200
                                                        The number of sensors

 Fig. 8  Effect of the number of sensors on the network lifetime


                                                                                               13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 3292                                                                                          N. a. Mottaki et al.


                                     200
                                             N=200
                                     180     N=400
                                             N=600
                                     160

                                     140




                  Network lifetime
                                     120

                                     100

                                      80

                                      60

                                      40

                                      20
                                        10   20       30     40     50      60       70   80
                                                  The active time slots of sensors

 Fig. 9  Effect of different values of active time slots and different values of sensors on the network life-
 time



 of the three algorithms are shown in Fig. 8. The two proposed algorithms showed
 better results than those of the MCSSA algorithm.
    Experiment 5. This is the first experiment of the second group. As mentioned
 earlier, experiments 5–8 examine the impacts of the network parameters on the pro-
 posed scheduling algorithm. The fifth experiment was aimed at investigating how
 the network lifetime in the proposed algorithm will change with different values of
 sensor activity time. Network parameters were determined as T = 20, M = 100, and
 R = 200, and the numbers of sensors were set into three values of N = 200, 400,
 and 600 in three different implementations, respectively, as shown in Fig. 9. The
 active time slots of the sensors in all three runs vary from 10 to 80 with incremen-
 tal step of 10. As it was expected, the results indicated that as the sensors’ activ-
 ity time increased, the coverage sets’ lifetime and consequently the network lifetime
 prolonged. Moreover, the network lifetime prolonged by increasing the number of
 sensors for fixed points of active time slots. When the active time slots of the sen-
 sors remain unchanged and the number of sensors increases, the number of common
 sensors among different coverage sets decreases, and they can perform their tasks
 longer, hence increasing the network lifetime.
    Experiment 6. This experiment was also designed to investigate the impact of
 changing the active time slots of the sensors on the network lifetime. However, the
 difference is that the number of coverage sets was set to M = 100, 200, and 300 in
 three separate performances, and the values of T = 20 and N = 1000 and the active
 time slots of the sensors were changed from [0, 10] to [70, 80]. For each distinct
 implementation, it was observed that the network lifetime extended by increasing

 13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 An effective hybrid genetic algorithm and tabu search for…                                              3293


                                     300
                                                M=100
                                                M=200
                                     250        M=300



                                     200




                  Network lifetime
                                     150



                                     100



                                      50



                                       0
                                      [0,10] [10,20] [20,30] [30,40] [40,50] [50,60] [60,70] [70,80]
                                                  The active time slots of sensors

 Fig. 10  Effect of different values of active time slots and different values of targets on the network life-
 time


 the active time slots of the sensors. After comparing all three runs, the diagrams
 indicated that the network lifetime extended slightly as the number of coverage sets
 increased at the fixed points during the sensors’ activity time. sensors in Accord-
 ingly, it can be said that as the number of coverage sets increases, the number of
 common among the coverage sets increases, and the lifetime of the coverage sets
 will run out by discharging the sensors energy, as shown in Fig. 10.
    Experiment 7. This experiment was performed to evaluate the impact of the num-
 ber of coverage sets under different conditions of the proposed algorithm. In this
 experiment, we set the active time slots of all sensors equal to 10 (a fixed value) and
 the values of N = 100 and R = 200; then, the number of coverage sets was increased
 from 10 to 80 with incremental step of 10. This experiment was performed in three
 runs with values of T = 10, 20, and 30. As indicated by the diagrams in Fig. 11, as
 the number of coverage sets increased, the lifetime of the network increased. Based
 on the diagram, it can be concluded that the number of sensors shared among the
 coverage sets will increase and therefore the network lifetime will be limited by fix-
 ing the number of sensors and at the same time increasing the number of coverage
 sets.
    Experiment 8. This experiment was aimed at evaluating the effect of the num-
 ber of coverage sets under different conditions (as in Experiment 7) of the proposed
 algorithm,. The difference is that the values of sensing radius was set to R = 100,
 200, and 300 in three different runs. The other parameters were set as follow: the
 active time slots of the sensors were randomly selected within the range of [0, 10]
 and the values of N = 1000 and T = 20. According to these three runs, it is obvious

                                                                                                       13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 3294                                                                                           N. a. Mottaki et al.


                                     60
                                                  T=10
                                     55           T=20
                                                  T=30
                                     50

                                     45




                  Network lifetime
                                     40

                                     35

                                     30

                                     25

                                     20

                                     15

                                     10
                                       10    20          30     40     50    60     70    80
                                                         The number of cover sets
 Fig. 11  Effect of the number of coverage sets and different values of T on the network lifetime


                                     14
                                              R=100
                                     13       R=200
                                              R=300

                                     12




                  Network lifetime
                                     11


                                     10


                                     9


                                     8


                                     7


                                     6
                                     100    200          300   400    500    600    700   800
                                                     The number of cover sets
 Fig. 12  Effect of the number of coverage sets and different values of R on the network lifetime




 13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 An effective hybrid genetic algorithm and tabu search for…                        3295


 that for a fixed number of coverage sets, the longer the sensing radius, the loner
 the network lifetime will be. The reason is that, in such condition, more targets are
 covered by each sensor and the number of shared sensors decreases as the sensing
 radius increases. Consequently, the sensor energy is not discharged quickly; thus,
 the coverage sets can run longer, hence increasing the network lifetime (see Fig. 12).


 5.1 Discussion on simulation results

 Greedy-based algorithms can nd schedule coverage sets in a way to maximize the
 network lifetime in real time. Remember that the initial candidates closeness to the
 optimal solution greatly affects the greedy-based algorithms performance, and the
 scheme may lead to a local minimum because of its heuristic search. Many scholars
 have applied GA to the solution of optimization problems, especially in association
 with scheduling algorithms.
     When using GA, different outcomes may be achieved in independent operations,
 and there is not any guarantee to obtain an optimal result. Acceptable results could
 be achieved in cases where the “global” search space is tested globally. The use of
 evolutionary algorithms and high iterations in the global search space would result
 in higher computational cost in comparison with to the greedy algorithm. When
 dealing with optimization problems with large search space, to achieve a global (or
 a near global) optimization, a high computational cost is predictable, which is worth
 it. GA is often capable of identifying the promising areas for global optima within
 a certain search space; however, in some cases, it may face difficulty in locating the
 exact minimum of these optima [10]. Particularly, for scheduling coverage set, the
 search space is extremely large; for that reason, designs found by GA could still
 have room for further improvement. The current study uses a novel process based
 on TS to refine the designs. GA is an algorithm inspired by the evolution process
 and works on a group of solutions at each unit of time, whereas TS works based on
 concepts from artificial intelligence and operates on only a single solution at each
 unit of time [16]. TS applies basic, problem-specific operators to the exploration
 of a search space and memory, called the tabu list, with the aim of keeping track of
 the parts already visited. TS guides the optimization to new areas; this way, it could
 overcome local minima, and also it could achieve the global optimum.



 6 Conclusion and further work

 The target coverage and prolonged network lifetime are regarded as two major prob-
 lems in DSNs. To solve the coverage problem by using the sensor scheduling tech-
 nique, the network sensors can be divided into a number of coverage sets. Making
 use of the GA and TS algorithms, this article presented a hybrid GA-TS algorithm to
 achieve the optimal or near-optimal coverage set scheduling. With the aim of prov-
 ing the superiority of the proposed algorithms, its results were compared with those
 of one of the recently presented algorithm (MCSSA). The results indicated that the
 proposed algorithms had a better performance than the MCSSA algorithm and it

                                                                            13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 3296                                                                                         N. a. Mottaki et al.


 successfully increased the network lifetime by finding the optimal scheduling cov-
 erage sets in the network. Coverage management in sensor networks is an impor-
 tant issue and more research is needed in this area. Existing studies have shown that
 multi objective evolutionary algorithms (MOEAs) leads to better coverage manage-
 ment in sensor networks, conservation of sensor energy, and thus extended the net-
 work lifetime. A part of our future work is to use MOEAs for coverage set schedul-
 ing in sensor networks and will study its efficiency in regard to this problem.


 Data Availability The following information was supplied regarding data availability: Data will be made
 available on reasonable request.

 Declarations

 Conflict of interest All authors declare that they have no conflict of interest that are relevant to the content
 of this article.




 References
  1. Gulati K et al (2022) A review paper on wireless sensor network techniques in internet of things
     (IoT). Mater Today Proc 51:161–165. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​matpr.​2021.​05.​067
  2. Mohammed SB et. al (2020) Wireless sensor network design methodologies: a Survey. In: Journal
     of Sensors. 2020, https://​doi.​org/​10.​1155/​2020/​95928​36
  3. Mottaki NA et al (2021) Multi-objective optimization for coverage aware sensor node scheduling in
     directional sensor networks. In J Appl Dyn Syst Control 4(1):43–52
  4. Sangwan A, Singh RP (2015) Survey on coverage problems in wireless sensor networks. Wirel Pers
     Commun 80(4):1475–1500
  5. Ajam L, Nodehi A, Mohamadi H (2021) A Genetic-based algorithm to solve priority-based target
     coverage problem in directional sensor networks. In: Journal of Applied Dynamic Systems and Con-
     trol, 4(1):89-96
  6. Mottaki NA, Motameni H, Mohamadi H (2022) A genetic algorithm-based approach for solving the
     target Q-coverage problem in over and under provisioned directional sensor networks. Phys Com-
     mun 54:101719. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​phycom.​2022.​101719
  7. Hanh NT et al (2019) An efficient genetic algorithm for maximizing area coverage in wireless sen-
     sor networks. Inf Sci 488:58–75
  8. Tao D, Wu T (2015) A survey on barrier coverage problem in directional sensor networks. In: IEEE
     Sensors Journal. 15(2):876-885
  9. Singh j, Kaur R, Singh D (2020) A survey and taxonomy on energy management schemes in wire-
     less sensor networks. In: Journal of Systems Architecture 111:101782
 10. Boukerche A, Sun P (2018) Connectivity and coverage based protocols for wireless sensor net-
     works. Ad Hoc Netw 80:54–69. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​adhoc.​2018.​07.​003
 11. Luo C et al (2020) Maximizing network lifetime using coverage sets scheduling in wireless sensor
     networks. In: Ad Hoc Networks. 98:102037
 12. Chowdhury SM, Hossain A (2020) Different energy saving schemes in wireless sensor networks: a
     survey. Wirel Pers Commun 114:2043–2062. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11277-​020-​07461-5
 13. SPermutations (2022) ByDarrell whitley book evolutionary computation 1 Edition1st Edition first
     published2000 ImprintCRC Press Pages12 eBook ISBN9781315274638, https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
     jksuci.​2019.​05.​006
 14. Zishan AA et al (2018) Maximizing heterogeneous coverage in over and under provisioned visual
     sensor networks. J Netw Comput Appl 124:44–62
 15. Kim Y et al (2013) Lifetime maximization considering target coverage and connectivity in direc-
     tional image/video sensor networks. In: The Journal of Supercomputing. 65(1): 365-382


 13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
 An effective hybrid genetic algorithm and tabu search for…                                               3297


 16. Mohamadi H, Salleh S, Razali MN (2014) Heuristic methods to maximize network lifetime in direc-
     tional sensor networks with adjustable sensing ranges. In: Journal of Network and Computer Appli-
     cations. 26-35
 17. Alibeiki A, Motameni H, Mohamadi H (2019) A new genetic-based approach for maximizing
     network lifetime in directional sensor networks with adjustable sensing ranges. In: Pervasive and
     Mobile Computing. 52:1-12
 18. Balaji S et al (2020) Energy efficient target coverage for a wireless sensor network. Measurement
     165:108167. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​measu​rement.​2020.​108167
 19. Arivudainambi D et al (2021) Cuckoo search algorithm for target coverage and sensor scheduling
     with adjustable sensing range in wireless sensor network. J Discret Math Sci Cryptogr. https://​doi.​
     org/​10.​1080/​09720​529.​2020.​17533​01
 20. El-Sherif M et al (2018) Lifetime maximisation of disjoint wireless sensor networks using multiob-
     jective genetic algorithm. IET Wirel Sens Syst 8(5):200–207. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1049/​iet-​wss.​2017.​
     0069
 21. Mohamadi H, Salleh S, Ismail AS (2014) A learning automata-based solution to the priority-based
     target coverage problem in directional sensor networks. Wirel Pers Commun 79(3):2323–2338
 22. Gil JM, Han YH (2011) A target coverage scheduling scheme based on genetic algorithms in direc-
     tional sensor networks. In: Sensors. 1888-1906
 23. Katti A (2019) Target coverage in random wireless sensor networks using cover sets. J King Saud
     Univ Comput Inf Sci 34:734–746
 24. Katoch S et al (2021) A review on genetic algorithm: past, present, and future. Multimed Tools
     Appl 80:8091–8126
 25. Hussain A et al (2017) Genetic algorithm for traveling salesman problem with modified cycle cross-
     over operator. Comput Intell Neurosci 2017:1–7
 26. Garai G, Chaudhurii BB (2013) A novel hybrid genetic algorithm with Tabu search for optimizing
     multi-dimensional functions and point pattern recognition. Inf Sci 221:28–48
 27. Li X, Gao L (2016) An effective hybrid genetic algorithm and tabu search for flexible job shop
     scheduling problem. Int J Prod Econ 174:93–110
 28. Prajapati V, p et al Tabu Search Algorithm (TSA): A Comprehensive Survey. In:2020 3rd Interna-
     tional Conference on emerging technologies in computer engineering: Machine Learning and Inter-
     net of Things (ICETCE), https://​doi.​org/​10.​1109/​ICETC​E48199.​2020.​90917​43.

 Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps
 and institutional affiliations.

 Springer Nature or its licensor holds exclusive rights to this article under a publishing agreement with the
 author(s) or other rightsholder(s); author self-archiving of the accepted manuscript version of this article
 is solely governed by the terms of such publishing agreement and applicable law.




                                                                                                 13
Content courtesy of Springer Nature, terms of use apply. Rights reserved.
Terms and Conditions
Springer Nature journal content, brought to you courtesy of Springer Nature Customer Service Center
GmbH (“Springer Nature”).
Springer Nature supports a reasonable amount of sharing of research papers by authors, subscribers
and authorised users (“Users”), for small-scale personal, non-commercial use provided that all
copyright, trade and service marks and other proprietary notices are maintained. By accessing,
sharing, receiving or otherwise using the Springer Nature journal content you agree to these terms of
use (“Terms”). For these purposes, Springer Nature considers academic use (by researchers and
students) to be non-commercial.
These Terms are supplementary and will apply in addition to any applicable website terms and
conditions, a relevant site licence or a personal subscription. These Terms will prevail over any
conflict or ambiguity with regards to the relevant terms, a site licence or a personal subscription (to
the extent of the conflict or ambiguity only). For Creative Commons-licensed articles, the terms of
the Creative Commons license used will apply.
We collect and use personal data to provide access to the Springer Nature journal content. We may
also use these personal data internally within ResearchGate and Springer Nature and as agreed share
it, in an anonymised way, for purposes of tracking, analysis and reporting. We will not otherwise
disclose your personal data outside the ResearchGate or the Springer Nature group of companies
unless we have your permission as detailed in the Privacy Policy.
While Users may use the Springer Nature journal content for small scale, personal non-commercial
use, it is important to note that Users may not:

 1. use such content for the purpose of providing other users with access on a regular or large scale
    basis or as a means to circumvent access control;
 2. use such content where to do so would be considered a criminal or statutory offence in any
    jurisdiction, or gives rise to civil liability, or is otherwise unlawful;
 3. falsely or misleadingly imply or suggest endorsement, approval , sponsorship, or association
    unless explicitly agreed to by Springer Nature in writing;
 4. use bots or other automated methods to access the content or redirect messages
 5. override any security feature or exclusionary protocol; or
 6. share the content in order to create substitute for Springer Nature products or services or a
    systematic database of Springer Nature journal content.
In line with the restriction against commercial use, Springer Nature does not permit the creation of a
product or service that creates revenue, royalties, rent or income from our content or its inclusion as
part of a paid for service or for other commercial gain. Springer Nature journal content cannot be
used for inter-library loans and librarians may not upload Springer Nature journal content on a large
scale into their, or any other, institutional repository.
These terms of use are reviewed regularly and may be amended at any time. Springer Nature is not
obligated to publish any information or content on this website and may remove it or features or
functionality at our sole discretion, at any time with or without notice. Springer Nature may revoke
this licence to you at any time and remove access to any copies of the Springer Nature journal content
which have been saved.
To the fullest extent permitted by law, Springer Nature makes no warranties, representations or
guarantees to Users, either express or implied with respect to the Springer nature journal content and
all parties disclaim and waive any implied warranties or warranties imposed by law, including
merchantability or fitness for any particular purpose.
Please note that these rights do not automatically extend to content, data or other material published
by Springer Nature that may be licensed from third parties.
If you would like to use or distribute our Springer Nature journal content to a wider audience or on a
regular basis or in any other manner not expressly permitted by these Terms, please contact Springer
Nature at

onlineservice@springernature.com
