                                       A genetic algorithm-based energy-aware
                                       multi-hop clustering scheme for
                                       heterogeneous wireless sensor networks
                                       R. Muthukkumar1, Lalit Garg2, K. Maharajan3, M. Jayalakshmi3, Nz
                                       Jhanjhi4, S. Parthiban5 and G. Saritha6
                                   1
                                     Department of Information Technology, National Engineering College, Kovilpatti, Thoothukudi,
                                     Tamil Nadu, India
                                   2
                                     Department of Computer information Systems, Faculty of Information and Communication
                                     Technology, University of Malta, Msida, Malta, Malta
                                   3
                                     Department of Computer Science and Engineering, School of Computing, Kalasalingam
                                     Academy of Research and Education, Krishnankoil, India
                                   4
                                     School of Computer Science, Taylor’s University, Subang Jaya, Selangor, Malaysia
                                   5
                                     Saveetha School of Engineering, Saveetha Institute of Medical and Technical Sciences, Chennai,
                                     Tamilnadu, India
                                   6
                                     Sri Sairam Institute of Technology,, Chennai, Tamilnadu, India


                                           ABSTRACT
                                           Background: The energy-constrained heterogeneous nodes are the most challenging
                                           wireless sensor networks (WSNs) for developing energy-aware clustering schemes.
                                           Although various clustering approaches are proven to minimise energy consumption
                                           and delay and extend the network lifetime by selecting optimum cluster heads (CHs),
                                           it is still a crucial challenge.
                                           Methods: This article proposes a genetic algorithm-based energy-aware multi-hop
                                           clustering (GA-EMC) scheme for heterogeneous WSNs (HWSNs). In HWSNs, all
                                           the nodes have varying initial energy and typically have an energy consumption
                                           restriction. A genetic algorithm determines the optimal CHs and their positions in
                                           the network. The ﬁtness of chromosomes is calculated in terms of distance,
                                           optimal CHs, and the node's residual energy. Multi-hop communication improves
                                           energy efﬁciency in HWSNs. The areas near the sink are deployed with more
Submitted 6 October 2021                   supernodes far away from the sink to solve the hot spot problem in WSNs near the
Accepted 15 June 2022                      sink node.
Published 15 August 2022                   Results: Simulation results proclaim that the GA-EMC scheme achieves a more
Corresponding authors                      extended network lifetime network stability and minimises delay than existing
Lalit Garg, lalit.garg@um.edu.mt
                                           approaches in heterogeneous nature.
Nz Jhanjhi,
NoorZaman.Jhanjhi@taylors.edu.my
Academic editor                        Subjects Algorithms and Analysis of Algorithms, Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Computer Networks and
Biju Issac                             Communications, Emerging Technologies, Internet of Things
Additional Information and             Keywords Heterogeneous wireless sensor networks, Multi-hop routing, Genetic algorithm,
Declarations can be found on           Clustering, Network lifetime, Throughput, End-to-end delay
page 22
DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029              INTRODUCTION
   Copyright                           The latest technology development in wireless communication, sensing devices, and
2022 Muthukumar et al.
                                       microelectronics have opened new frontiers in wireless sensor networks (WSNs). Critical
Distributed under
Creative Commons CC-BY 4.0             WSNs applications include environmental monitoring (Lanzolla & Spadavecchia, 2021;




                                       How to cite this article Muthukkumar R, Garg L, Maharajan K, Jayalakshmi M, Jhanjhi N, Parthiban S, Saritha G. 2022. A genetic
                                       algorithm-based energy-aware multi-hop clustering scheme for heterogeneous wireless sensor networks. PeerJ Comput. Sci. 8:e1029
                                       DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029
                                   Sampathkumar et al., 2020), transport (Sant et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2020; Andrushia
                                   et al., 2021), surveillance systems (Garg et al., 2020a; Chukwu, Garg & Zahra, 2021),
                                   healthcare (Chakraborty et al., 2020b, 2020a; Agrawal et al., 2019; Bonello et al., 2018; Audu
                                   et al., 2017b, 2017a; Bugeja, Garg & Audu, 2016; Bugeja & Garg, 2015; Agrawal, Garg &
                                   Dauwels, 2013), emotions recognition and monitoring (Salankar, Mishra & Garg, 2021;
                                   Jayalakshmi et al., 2021; Bhattacharyya et al., 2021; Mangion et al., 2020), home
                                   automation (Garg et al., 2020b), battleﬁeld monitoring, and industrial automation and
                                   control (Smaragdakis, Matta & Bestavros, 2004). WSNs contain more sensor nodes
                                   capable of sensing the physical phenomenon, packet forwarding, and communicating the
                                   packets to the destination. However, each sensor node has limitations, such as limited
                                   memory, restricted processing capability, short-range transmission, ﬁnite energy
                                   resources, and low storage capability. WSNs are becoming a good network for protecting,
                                   controlling, and facilitating real-time applications (Qing, Zhu & Wang, 2006). The primary
                                   constraint of the WSNs is the limited, non-rechargeable battery-powered sensor nodes,
                                   and these nodes have used their energy for sensing, sending, and receiving the data. When
                                   the sensor battery is drained, several areas in the sensor ﬁeld will lack coverage, and
                                   valuable data from these areas will not reach the sink. Using energy among the nodes and
                                   prolonging the network’s lifetime are considered the primary challenge for HWSNs.
                                      Various routing and clustering algorithms have been addressed to minimise average
                                   energy consumption in WSNs (Akyildiz et al., 2002; Tyagi & Kumar, 2013; Heinzelman,
                                   Chandrakasan & Balakrishnan, 2000; Younis & Fahmy, 2004; Shang, 2013; Yu et al., 2012;
                                   Amgoth & Jana, 2015; Jin et al., 2013; Mahajan, Malhotra & Sharma, 2014; Kumar, Aseri
                                   & Patel, 2009). CHs in WSNs allocate the energy to their member nodes to maintain the
                                   load-balancing of a cluster (Saini & Sharma, 2010). This protocol utilises local
                                   coordination to enhance scalability and reduce the large number of data packets
                                   communicated to the sink. The clustering protocol splits up the network structure into
                                   many clusters, and every cluster contains CH and cluster members (CMs). The CM node
                                   collects and sends information to the respective CH in each cluster. Each CH gathers the
                                   data packets from the CMs and carries out the data aggregation process. Eventually, the
                                   aggregated data is communicated to the sink. The protocol in Capone et al. (2019) selects
                                   CHs periodically using residual energy and the degree of the nodes. This approach has a
                                   low overhead and performs CH selection uniformly across the network. In Wei et al.
                                   (2011), the proposed algorithm analyses the routing algorithms in WSNs to extend the
                                   network lifetime, save power, and maintain load-balancing. In Tanwar, Kumar &
                                   Rodrigues (2015), the energy consumption and nonuniform node distribution in WSNs
                                   have been discussed. An energy-aware routing algorithm is presented for cluster-based
                                   WSNs to stabilise the energy consumption of the CHs (Shang, 2013). Quality of service
                                   (QoS) and energy-efﬁciency requirements are satisﬁed in practical WSNs (Yu et al., 2012).
                                   Amgoth & Jana (2015) highlights the optimal CH selection cluster formation and
                                   maintains the load-balanced network. For a given distance, energy efﬁciency improves if
                                   the data is transmitted through multi-hop. By properly selecting the CHs and the next-hop
                                   nodes for multi-hop routing, energy spent by the sensor nodes can be reduced.



Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                    2/30
                                      Jin et al. (2013) analysed the impact of heterogeneity in WSNs, energy level, and
                                   hierarchical cluster structures. Smaragdakis, Matta & Bestavros (2004) proposed a protocol
                                   that prolongs the stability period of sensor nodes in heterogeneous WSNs (HWSNs). In
                                   Qing, Zhu & Wang (2006), Saini & Sharma (2010), average network energy and the nodes’
                                   residual energy select the optimal CHs. In Capone et al. (2019), the proposed algorithm
                                   minimises delay based on signal-to-interference-and-noise-ratio (SINR) in WSNs. Wei
                                   et al. (2011) found optimal cluster sizes based on the hop count to the sink node. It is
                                   also used to extend the network lifetime and minimise energy consumption. Several
                                   heterogeneous routing protocols in WSNs (Tanwar, Kumar & Rodrigues, 2015) are
                                   reviewed and analysed with performance metrics. The algorithm in Bandyopadhyay &
                                   Coyle (2003) organises the nodes into several clusters in WSNs and generates a hierarchy of
                                   CHs. A genetic algorithm (GA) is a meta-heuristic algorithm used to solve optimisation
                                   problems (Pantazis, Nikolidakis & Vergados, 2013; Pal & Saraswat, 2017). GA is an
                                   appropriate scheme for solving any clustering problems in WSNs. It is also used to resolve
                                   persistent optimisation problems (Mehta & Pal, 2017). In this article, HWSNs use GA for
                                   solving the multi-hop clustering based on the newly deﬁned ﬁtness function
                                   (Kachitvichyanukul, 2012).
                                      Existing solutions have the advantage of cluster formation done through the residual
                                   energy and prolonging the lifetime of WSNs. However, re-clustering consumes more
                                   energy while the end-to-end delay is not minimised. This motivates us to devise an
                                   approach for designing energy-aware multi-hop clustering for HWSNs. WSNs with
                                   heterogeneous nodes result in better network stability and extend the network lifetime.
                                   Energy consumption has been minimised using GA by selecting the optimal CHs during
                                   the re-clustering. The main contributions of this article are speciﬁed as follows:

                                    A GA-based energy-aware multi-hop clustering algorithm (GA-EMC) is proposed for
                                     selecting the optimal number of CHs dynamically during the re-clustering.
                                    A framework for optimised transmission scheduling and routing is formulated to reduce
                                     the delay under the SINR model for HWSNs.
                                    A combination of weak and robust sensor nodes using their residual energy mitigates
                                     the re-clustering issues.
                                    For optimising cluster construction, the GA maintains the stability of the nodes in a
                                     network.
                                    A dynamic power allocation scheme for sensor nodes is proposed to have a guaranteed
                                     QoS for nodes.

                                      The structure of this article starts with the introduction related to the wireless sensor
                                   network, genetic algorithm, and multi-hop clustering paradigms. The following section
                                   describes the existing multi-hop clustering algorithms and their issues. In the next section,
                                   we present the GA-EMC algorithm, followed by the section which addresses the
                                   experimental results and analyses the performance of GA-EMC. The following section is a
                                   discussion, and ﬁnally, the last section discusses the conclusion.



Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                   3/30
                                   RELATED WORKS
                                   This section presents the various modern and advanced multi-hop clustering schemes in
                                   WSNs. Many researchers have done some work in multi-hop clustering algorithms based
                                   on GA, and an overview of that work is given here. Saini & Sharma (2010) developed the
                                   probability-based CH selection and decreased the average CHs energy consumption. In
                                   Capone et al. (2019), Wei et al. (2011), the spatial distribution of CHs in WSNs by
                                   constructing a multi-hop table. It is also used to decrease the CHs when directly
                                   transmitted to the sink or base station (BS). The algorithm of Tanwar, Kumar & Rodrigues
                                   (2015) selects the CHs with higher residual energy and achieves better load-balancing
                                   among CHs. In Bandyopadhyay & Coyle (2003), CHs energy consumption was minimised
                                   during the data routing process and achieved better time complexity. The procotol of
                                   Pantazis, Nikolidakis & Vergados (2013) satisﬁes the QoS requirements in WSNs, and
                                   (Amgoth & Jana, 2015) addresses the cluster formation and CH selection using weight
                                   metrics in HWSNs.
                                      In general, sensor networks can be heterogeneous regarding the initial energy,
                                   computational ability of the WSN nodes, and the bandwidth of the links (Jin et al., 2013).
                                   Designing WSNs with heterogeneous nodes increases the reliability and network lifetime.
                                   Computational and link heterogeneity reduces the latency in data transmission
                                   (Smaragdakis, Matta & Bestavros, 2004; Qing, Zhu & Wang, 2006). Various parameters are
                                   used to classify the nodes in HWSNs (Saini & Sharma, 2010). Capone et al. (2019) studied
                                   transmission scheduling and multi-hop routing to minimise delay using SINR. The initial
                                   energy varies according to the node’s distance from the sink to overcome the energy hole
                                   problem in multi-hop networks (Wei et al., 2011). Tanwar, Kumar & Rodrigues (2015)
                                   categorised several heterogeneous routing protocols with predeﬁned parameters by
                                   enhancing network lifetime and node heterogeneity in WSNs.
                                      GA has been used for the CHs’ optimal selection in recent research. The main focus of
                                   the GA-based clustering algorithms is the ﬁtness function. The ﬁtness function determines
                                   the goodness of an individual to be selected for the next generation (Bandyopadhyay &
                                   Coyle, 2003). Pantazis, Nikolidakis & Vergados (2013) critically analysed the energy-
                                   efﬁcient routing protocols for WSNs. The method in Pal & Saraswat (2017) is based on
                                   biogeography-based optimisation in HWSNs. The ﬁtness value is modiﬁed further by
                                   incorporating the residual energy of the remaining nodes that enhances the performance.
                                   It prolongs the network lifetime (Mehta & Pal, 2017). Meta-heuristics techniques are
                                   widely applied to solve several clustering problems in WSNs (Kachitvichyanukul, 2012;
                                   Bhushan, Pal & Antoshchuk, 2018). Fanian & Rafsanjani (2019) reviewed the various
                                   protocols and their properties in WSNs. Afsar, Mohammad & Tayarani (2014)
                                   investigated and presented more clustering approaches.
                                      Bari, Jaekel & Bandyopadhyay’s (2008) approach formulates clusters and considers the
                                   relay nodes as CHs in two-tiered sensor networks that prolong the relay node lifetime. The
                                   method in Younis, Youssef & Arisha (2003) extends the network lifetime dynamic route
                                   selection and reduces energy consumption. Liu & Lin (2005) critically investigated and
                                   addressed the power-conserving issues in WSNs, and the algorithm in Zhang et al. (2017)



Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                 4/30
                                   solves the energy balance problem in WSNs. Gupta & Pandey (2016) have considered the
                                   location of BS and residual energy as clustering parameters to solve an energy hole
                                   problem in HWSNs. Darabkh, Zomot & Al-qudah’s (2019) scheme minimises the average
                                   energy consumption and prolongs the lifetime of WSNs.
                                       Javaid et al.’s (2013a) technique for HWSNs dynamically elects the CH. It extends the
                                   network lifetime. Pal et al. (2015a) analyses the heterogeneous node locations and
                                   selects optimal CH based on the distance between the clusters. The algorithm in Sarkar &
                                   Senthil Murugan (2019) improves the energy and lifetime of both nodes and networks by
                                   choosing the optimal CHs. Kumar & Kumar (2016), Mann & Singh (2017) maximise
                                   the network energy and extend nodes’ network lifetime by selecting optimal CH in WSNs.
                                   Fan’s (2013) method investigates several issues such as energy consumption, coverage, and data
                                   routing in WSNs. This method improves the coverage ratio and prolongs network lifetime.
                                   Javaid et al.’s (2013b) scheme increases the node stability period and sends more packets to BS.
                                   Singh & Lobiyal (2012a) designs an energy-aware cluster by selecting optimal CHs in WSNs.
                                       Ali, Shahzad & Khan’s (2012) algorithm optimises the clusters in a network and
                                   minimises the data trafﬁc and energy dissipation among nodes. Rakhee & Srinivas (2016)
                                   continuously monitors patients’ data by selecting an optimal path in the body area
                                   network. It also enhances network lifetime, load balancing, and energy on the overall
                                   network. Pal et al.’s (2015b) method achieves a load-balanced network. It prolongs the
                                   lifetime of WSNs by optimising CH selection approach (Hoang et al., 2014) that reduces
                                   the distance between the CH and CMs in WSNs to improve energy conservation. Lin
                                   et al.’s (2012) approach maximises the lifetime of heterogeneous nodes based on sensing
                                   coverage and network connectivity. The approach in Singh & Lobiyal (2012b) selects
                                   energy-aware clusters and optimal CH based on hop count and locations. Pal et al. (2020)
                                   considers the GA parameters for enhancing the CH performance in WSNs. Mhemed et al.’s
                                   (2012) approach investigates the cluster formation that reduces energy consumption.
                                   Haseeb et al.’s (2019) method increases energy efﬁciency and data security against malicious
                                   activities. Zhang et al. (2019), Abo-Zahhad et al.’s (2014) algorithms prolong the network
                                   lifetime by selecting the optimal CHs and reducing average energy consumption.
                                       Delavar & Baradaran (2012) algorithm reduced energy consumption by selecting
                                   chromosomes in different states. Bayrakli & Erdogan (2012), Liu & Ravishankar (2011), Yu
                                   et al. (2011), Zhou et al. (2010) studied the optimal selection of clusters to extend the
                                   WSNs’ lifetime. Bencan et al. (2013) analyses the spatial distribution of heterogeneous
                                   nodes in WSNs and effectively avoids the energy hole problem. Jin et al.’s (2005) algorithm
                                   enhances the reported sensitivity of the nodes and optimises the solution quality in
                                   HWSNs management. Attea & Khalil (2012) compares the various evolutionary
                                   algorithms with network lifetime, node stability period, and energy efﬁciency. Elhoseny
                                   et al.’s (2015) method optimises heterogeneous sensor node clustering. It dramatically
                                   extends the network lifetime. Huang et al.’s (2021) method was used to minimise the delay
                                   and collision and reduce the energy consumption in WSNs. The protocol in Deng et al.
                                   (2021) improves energy utilisation and minimises the delay in sensor networks. Chauhan
                                   & Soni (2021) minimises the energy holes and prolongs the network’s lifetime in WSNs. In
                                   this approach, the network is divided into unequal clusters, and it considers the node’s


Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                      5/30
                                   residual energy and distance to the base station for cluster formation in WSNs. Nodes with
                                   the highest energy are considered CH for WSNs (Toor & Jain, 2019). Kamil, Naji & Turki’s
                                   (2020) techniques change the WSNs’ sink node position dynamically to increase residual
                                   energy and prolong the network lifetime.
                                       The method in Prabaharan & Jayashri (2019) selects the smart CH in WSNs to prolong
                                   the network lifetime. Optimal CH selection is performed for extending the network
                                   lifetime of WSN by using various attributes of sensor nodes (Kalaimani, Zah & Vashist,
                                   2020; Rajpoot & Dwivedi, 2019). Kashyap et al.’s (2019) algorithm performs load-balancing
                                   among sensor nodes for WSNs. Also, it balances the optimal number of CHs and evenly
                                   distributes the load among nodes. The technique of Zhang et al. (2016) performs that
                                   the sensors are scheduled into several disjoint complete cover sets in WSNs and activates
                                   them in batch for energy conservation. The algorithm in Chang et al. (2018) is suitable for
                                   small-scale WSNs and suffers from high network latency due to multiple forwarding
                                   operations. Chang et al. (2019), Wang et al. (2018b), Wang et al. (2020), Wang et al.
                                   (2018a), Wang et al. (2022), Tabatabaei (2020) and Vijayalakshmi & Anandan (2020)
                                   discussed the various energy management challenges for WSNs.
                                       Many research proposals exist in the related works addressing the energy-efﬁcient
                                   hierarchical clustering issues, but node heterogeneity of WSN nodes has not been exploited
                                   to its full potential.
                                       Energy efﬁciency is the essential component in extending the life of WSN systems that
                                   are resource-constrained, particularly in terms of energy. The energy-aware clustering
                                   algorithms become a signiﬁcant factor in WSNs since multi-hop clustering methods relate
                                   to the network’s communication operations. The energy, computation, and link are the
                                   three broadly divided basic types of heterogeneity of WSN. Another vital factor to consider
                                   is the heterogeneity of data creation rates, which considers nodes with varying data
                                   transmission requirements. As a result, distinct performance evaluation parameters must
                                   be used to categorise sensor nodes. So there is a necessity to categorise sensor nodes based
                                   on different performance evaluation metrics. Motivated by the above facts, in this article,
                                   we provide a genetic algorithm-based energy-aware multi-hop clustering scheme for
                                   heterogeneous WSNs. Table 1 shows the Summarisation of Related Works.
                                       The proposed method is similar to Capone et al. (2019) and Pal et al. (2020). Compared
                                   to existing works (Capone et al., 2019; Zhang et al., 2017; Darabkh, Zomot & Al-qudah,
                                   2019; Javaid et al., 2013a; Sarkar & Senthil Murugan, 2019; Kumar & Kumar, 2016; Mann
                                   & Singh, 2017; Ali, Shahzad & Khan, 2012; Pal et al., 2020), our study is distinguished by
                                   the type of algorithm. In this approach, two methods are investigated in HWSNs. The ﬁrst
                                   method uses GA to enhance performance by selecting the optimal CHs during the
                                   clustering and re-clustering phases. The second method extends the ﬁrst method by
                                   featuring optimal transmission scheduling. In this method, we carefully analyse the
                                   transmission scheduling and communication among CHs. As a result, we address various
                                   properties and analyses of node strategies to minimise the end-to-end delay, extend the
                                   network lifetime, and improve energy efﬁciency. However, this is the ﬁrst article presenting
                                   a GA-based energy-aware multi-hop clustering to minimise end-to-end delay, expand the
                                   network lifetime, and enhance energy efﬁciency in HWSNs.


Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                  6/30
  Table 1 The summarisation of related work.
 Name of the           Functionality                                 Advantages                         Disadvantages
 proposed solutions
 HEED (Kumar et al., Cluster heads (CH) have been selected      Surely guarantee connectivity of        It works only on two-level hierarchy, not to
  2020)               according to a hybrid of the node residual clustered networks                       multilevel hierarchies
                      energy
 CATD (Andrushia       It is improved in the cluster data            It reduces the network energy,     Hot-spot problems are created
  et al., 2021)          transmission phase after the CHs are          network overhead, and cost.
                         selected
 EADC (Garg et al.,    It uses competition range to construct        Achieves load balance among CHs Uneven clustering strategy
  2020a)                 clusters of even sizes.
 ERA (Chukwu, Garg The clever strategy of CH selection,      Achieves constant message and              High message complexity for building
  & Zahra, 2021)    residual energy of the CHs and the intra- linear time complexity.                    backbone network of CHs.
                    cluster distance for cluster formation.
 S-MDSP (Bugeja,       Delay-minimization scheduling for multi- Minimising the end-to-end delay         The delay is signiﬁcantly reduced by
   Garg & Audu,         hop networks.                                                                    combining cooperative forwarding (CF)
   2016)                                                                                                 and forward interference cancellation
                                                                                                         (FIC).
 E2HRC (Shang,         Messaging structure for clustering and        Balancing average energy       Delay occurred
  2013)                 routing                                       consumption, network load and
                                                                      improving network performance
 EDB-CHS-BOF           A tight closed-form expression for the        Balancing energy consumption      It is more sensitive to any changes in the
  (Amgoth & Jana,       optimal number of CHs in the network          amongst all sensor nodes and       network size.
  2015)                                                               prolonging the network lifetime.
 EDDEEC (Jin et al.,   Probabilities for CH selection based on       Achieves longer network lifetime   Dynamic random channel selection
  2013)                 initial, the remaining energy level of the    and stability period
                        nodes and average energy of network
 FABC (Saini &         optimally selecting cluster-head based on     Maximise the network energy and –
  Sharma, 2010)         ﬁtness function value of nodes                lifetime of nodes
 iABC (Capone et al., Obtain optimal cluster heads                   Improves energy efﬁciency in       –
   2019)                                                              WSNs
 MOPSO (Pantazis,      optimise the number of clusters in an ad Provide an energy-efﬁcient        –
  Nikolidakis &         hoc network as well as energy dissipation solution and reduce the network
  Vergados, 2013)       in nodes                                  trafﬁc
 EEWC (Afsar,          Solve the clustering problem in a wireless    Improve the performance of         –
  Mohammad &            sensor network                                WSNs
  Tayarani, 2014)



                                         MATERIALS AND METHODS
                                         In HWSNs, clusters are formed based on GA. GA ﬁnds optimal CHs by considering the
                                         network coverage and its energy level. The CHs perform data aggregation and transmit the
                                         combined data packets to the sink. A multi-hop network is used to send packets from
                                         CHs to the sink. Neighbouring sink nodes consider regular, advanced, and supernodes.
                                         These nodes have different initial energy. Regions near the sink have a more signiﬁcant
                                         number of supernodes than other regions. The next-hop CH is selected with the distance
                                         between the CHs, the residual energy, the number of CMs, and the neighbouring CHs
                                         associated with the given CH in routing. Various symbols and notations used in the
                                         proposed work are mentioned in Table 2.



Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                                         7/30
                                      Table 2 The list of symbols and notations in this article.
                                     Symbol                                                    Description
                                     G                                                         Bi-directed Graph
                                     V                                                         Network size
                                     E                                                         Two-way communication links
                                     C                                                         Direct links
                                     c                                                         Noise power
                                     g                                                         SINR value
                                     r                                                         Energy at node
                                     M                                                         Data packet set
                                     d                                                         Distance between the nodes
                                     q                                                         The energy dissipated in the source and sink
                                     a, b                                                      Space and multipath fading coefﬁcients
                                     $                                                         Size of optimal CHs
                                     #                                                         The distance among CHs and CMs
                                     s                                                         Two CHs distance


                                   Multi-hop network model
                                   A WSNs is assumed to be a bidirected graph G ¼ ðV; E; CÞ; where V denotes the network
                                   size, E  V  V is two-way communication links, and C ¼ fði; jÞ; ðj; iÞ : fi; jg 2 Eg is the
                                                                                                                rði; jÞ
                                   direct links. We consider that fi; jg 2 E iff, the SINR is convinced, i.e.,           g and
                                                                                                                  c
                                   rðj; iÞ
                                            g; where rði; jÞ and rðj; iÞ be the energy at node j when node i is sending and
                                      c
                                   receiving data packets, respectively. It can be represented as rði; jÞ :¼ PðiÞuði; jÞ; rðj; iÞ :¼
                                   PðjÞuðj; iÞ; where PðiÞ and PðjÞ be the transmitted energy of nodes i and j. Here,
                                   uði; jÞ ¼ uðj; iÞ is to obtain the communication link fi; jg; c is the noise power and g
                                   is the SINR value. The network size occurrence to i 2 V is deﬁned by ðiÞ; i.e.,
                                   ðiÞ ¼ fj 2 V : fi; jg 2 Eg:
                                       Assume that the order of time T :¼ f1; 2; :::;sg and x is the group of nodes in a time.
                                   The direct link ði; jÞ 2 C is very dynamic, only if i 2 x; j 2
                                                                                                = x and the resulting SINR is
                                   convinced:
                                            rði; jÞ
                                            P              g                                                                            (1)
                                   cþ              rðk; jÞ
                                         j2x=fig

                                      A node can either send, receive, or be inactive at a particular time. A group c  C of
                                   communication links will be simultaneously very active for the compatible set ðcÞ
                                   situations. The group of active sensor node c is represented by xðcÞ :¼ fi : 9j; ði; jÞ 2 cg:
                                   The SINR is applied to communication links ði; jÞ 2 c :
                                             rði; jÞ
                                             P                   g                                                                      (2)
                                   cþ                  rðk; jÞ
                                         j2xðcÞ=fig




Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                                8/30
                                      Consider the data packet set M, and each data packet m 2 M needs a time for a
                                   particular transmission and is sent from source SðmÞ to sink DðmÞ: The data packets are
                                   available in the respective sources on time s ¼ 1. The time s ¼ T occurs in transmitting
                                   the packets and computes the total network delay.

                                   Optimised energy model
                                   The proposed GA-EMC is adopted an optimised energy model (Abo-Zahhad et al., 2015)
                                   that minimises energy consumption. The nodes’ energy is needed to communicate a data
                                   packet consisting of l bits of a packet is denoted by Eq. (3).
                                             
                                               lq þ lad 2 ; d , d0
                                   rðl; dÞ ¼                                                                        (3)
                                               lq þ lbd4 ; d  d0
                                   where, d represents the distance between the nodes involved in the communication, q is
                                   the energy dissipated in the source and sink. It considers the factors like modulation and
                                   digital coding. The variables a and b represent space and multipath fading coefﬁcients, and
                                   the threshold d0 decide whether to use a multipath fading model.
                                      Equation (4) gives the energy spent by the sink receiving l bit of packets.
                                   rR ðlÞ ¼ l  q                                                                          (4)

                                      The CM node spends the energy to send a packet to its CH. The power spent by the CM
                                   to transmit l bits of a packet to its CH is determined by Eq. (5).
                                   rCMi ¼ rT ðl; di;CHi Þ                                                                  (5)
                                   where, di;CHi represents the Euclidean distance between the ith CM and its CH. A CH
                                   spends its power to receive a packet from its CMs, aggregate all the packets, and send it to
                                   other CHs. In addition to forwarding the local cluster data, CHs may also forward the
                                   trafﬁc received from other CHs. Equation (6) shows the energy required by CHs.

                                   rCHj ¼ NCM
                                           j rR ðlÞ þ Nj lrA þ rT ðl; dj;Pj Þ þ rCHj
                                                       CM                        F
                                                                                                                           (6)

                                            j rR ðlÞ denotes the energy spent by CH to accept data packets from the CMs.
                                   where, NCM
                                   The second gives the energy spent in aggregation, the third term gives the energy spent for
                                   data transmission to the next-hop CH, and the last term rFCHj represents the energy spent
                                   in forwarding the relay trafﬁc. rFCHj is the sum of energy required to receive k bits of the
                                   packet from all the low-level CHs and communicate the packets to the parent CH as shown
                                   by Eq. (7),

                                   rFCHj ¼ NCH
                                            CHj ðrR ðlÞ þ rT ðl; dj;Pj ÞÞ                                                  (7)


                                   Phases in the proposed GA-EMC protocol
                                   The proposed GA-EMC contains four phases: Heterogeneous Nodes Deployment,
                                   Clustering Formulation, Selection of Next-hop Neighbor, and Packet Transmission. The
                                   proposed GA-EMC scheme’s main idea is to optimise energy management of the WSNs by
                                   minimising the intra-cluster distance between a CH and a CM. Using Euclidean distance,


Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                  9/30
                                   the distance between the CM and the CH is calculated for WSNs. The CM is placed in the
                                   cluster with the least space between it and the others.
                                      The nodes interact directly with the sink if the distance between the sink and the sensor
                                   node is smaller than the distance between CH and CM. When a node joins a cluster, it
                                   sends a JOIN message to the other nodes and the CH to let them know it’s there. The CH
                                   assigns each node a time slot for data collection. After the data has been acquired, the CH
                                   aggregates it before sending it to the sink. The nodes may sleep during this entire process,
                                   but CH must be awake at all times. This lowers CH's energy, and few nodes die over time
                                   due to living in a sparse network. In each cycle, the clusters are reconstructed, and CHs are
                                   chosen.
                                      The ﬁtness function is used in the proposed GA-EMC technique to reduce the intra-
                                   cluster distance between the sensor nodes and the cluster head (CH). The function
                                   optimised the CH’s placement, which impacts the estimated number of packet
                                   retransmissions along the path and hence on the network’s overall energy usage. Because
                                   GA-EMC works with the ﬁtness function, the proposed technique is preferable in terms of
                                   performance measurement in terms of energy consumption.
                                      Minimising the distance between CMs and their CHs examines the sink distance, intra-
                                   cluster distance, and residual energy of CMs to determine their ideal positions. These
                                   phases are described below.

                                   Heterogeneous nodes deployment phase
                                   In multi-hop communication, the CHs are situated very close to the sink node and have to
                                   forward more packets received from other nodes, and their power is exhausted quicker
                                   than the CHs far away from the sink. This creates a hot spot in the regions near the sink.
                                   To solve this issue, sensor nodes are classiﬁed into regular nodes with initial energy r0 ,
                                   advanced nodes with initial energy r0 ð1 þ aÞ, and supernodes with initial energy
                                   r0 ð1 þ bÞ joules. The value of energy heterogeneity constants a and b are greater than 1.
                                   The WSNs consist of N nodes in total with ma  N advanced nodes, ms  N supernodes,
                                   and ð1  ma  ms Þ  N regular nodes. The areas near the sink node have more
                                   supernodes than the areas away from the sink.

                                   Clustering formulation phase
                                   In this phase, more clusters are formed in HWSNs. It also contains two other sub-phases,
                                   namely CHs Selection and CM Association phases. The CHs selection phase selects an
                                   optimal CH. Each CM is associated with any one of the nearest energy-efﬁcient CH in the
                                   CM association phase.

                                   CH selection phase
                                   This phase uses the GA for selecting optimal CHs and their location. GA is working on
                                   natural genetics and natural selection principles and is used to optimise various
                                   parameters. GA is applied in multiple ﬁelds for solving constrained and unconstrained
                                   optimisation problems (Bandyopadhyay & Coyle, 2003).



Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                  10/30
                                   CM association phase
                                   Each CH sends a CH advertisement ðCHADV Þ message containing its identiﬁer, location,
                                   initial and residual energies and starts a clustering timer with a predeﬁned value in the CM
                                   association phase. When a CM receives CHADV , it stores the information in the cluster
                                   table (CT). A CM may receive CHADV from one or more CHs. For each CH entry stored in
                                   the CT, CM calculates the cost as given by Eq. (8). CM selects their respective CH with low
                                   cost and sends JOIN message to the optimal CH.
                                   Cost ¼ c1  f1 þ ð1  c1 Þ  f2                                                             (8)

                                      Here c1 is a constant 0  c1  1. By setting proper value for c1 , we can decide how much
                                   importance to give to distance and energy in the CH selection. The terms f1 and f2 are
                                   calculated as provided by Eqs. (9) and (10).
                                                     j
                                          dðCMi ; CHi Þ
                                   f1 ¼                                                                                        (9)
                                             dmax
                                           j
                                          ki
                                   f2 ¼    j                                                                                  (10)
                                          ui
                                               j     j                                                 j                  j
                                   where, ki and ui represents the initial and residual energies of CHi respectively. CHi is a
                                   CH present in the cluster table of CMi and dmax is the distance among the CH and its CMs,
                                   and it is calculated by Eq. (11),
                                                 n             o
                                                             j
                                   dmax ¼ max dðCMi ; CHi Þ                                                              (11)

                                      The CHs collect the JOIN message from the CMs until the clustering timer expires.
                                   Upon the expiry of the timer, CHs create a dynamic time division multiple access (TDMA)
                                   scheduling for the packet transmission and send it to the CMs. The GA-based clustering
                                   algorithm shows the various steps involved in forming clusters and optimal CH selection.

                                   Next-hop neighbour selection phase
                                   Each CH broadcasts a neighbour advertisement message that contains information like
                                   identiﬁer, location, initial and residual energies, distance to sink, and the size of CMs
                                   associated with it. When a CH receives a neighbour advertisement message, it adds the
                                   information contained in the packet to the neighbour. As shown in Fig. 1, CHs use multi-
                                   hop paths to communicate the data packets to the sink. The next-hop CHs are chosen
                                   based on the distance, residual energy, and the size of CMs associated with the next-hop
                                   CH, the number of CHs that have reached via the next-hop CH. When more CHs can be
                                   reached via a CH, the CH will help forward the packet reliably. CH with more residual
                                   energy, less distance, smaller CMs, and more neighbouring CHs prefer the next-hop CH.
                                      For each CH node in the neighbour table, a merit value (MV) is calculated based on the
                                   above factors. Equation (12) shows the calculation of MV.
                                   MV ¼ h1  d1 þ h2  d2 þ h3  d3 þ h4  d4                                                 (12)
                                   h1 þ h2 þ h3 þ h4 ¼ 1                                                                      (13)


Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                 11/30
                                     Figure 1 Multi-hop communication from CH to sink. The red dots represent the cluster member
                                     (CM). The green dots represent the cluster head (CH). Solid line arrows represent the intra-cluster
                                     routing. Dotted lines represent the inter-cluster routing. Full-size  DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029/ﬁg-1


                                         ðdðCHi ; CHj Þ þ ðCHj ; SÞ
                                   d1 ¼                                                                                                 (14)
                                                   dmaxi
                                   dmaxi ¼ max fdðCHi ; CHj Þ þ ðCHj ; SÞg; j 2 h                                                       (15)

                                      Here h represents the neighbouring CHs of CHi .
                                          qj
                                   d2 ¼                                                                                                 (16)
                                          uj
                                   d3 ¼ NCM
                                         CHj ; j 2 h                                                                                    (17)
                                           1
                                   d4 ¼        j2h                                                                                      (18)
                                          NCM
                                           CHj


                                      In Eq. (13), h1 ; h2 ; h3 ; and h4 represents weights associated with different factors.

                                   Data transmission phase
                                   It involves communication within the cluster and communication between sink and CH. In
                                   intra-cluster communication, the CH receives packets from their CMs per the dynamic
                                   TDMA scheduling. CM also senses the data from the surroundings and sends them to the
                                   concerned CHs during a particular time. The CMs turn off their radio in the remaining time
                                   to save the energy wasted during idle listening. Each CH has many next-hop CH neighbours,
                                   and the best neighbour node is selected in the next-hop neighbour selection phase.

Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                               12/30
                                   Genetic algorithm
                                   In GA, each result to a speciﬁc problem is denoted by a chromosome using a binary coding
                                   scheme. A group of chromosomes constitutes the population. The initial population
                                   consists of randomly selected chromosomes, and each bit in the chromosome is called a
                                   gene. For each chromosome, a ﬁtness value is calculated, and it evaluates the effectiveness
                                   of the chromosome. Chromosomes with high ﬁtness values will get more chances to create
                                   new chromosomes. The GA involves three basic operations: selection, crossover, and
                                   mutation to select the best chromosome. The selection process duplicates good
                                   chromosomes and eliminates the poor ones, and there are many selection methods like
                                   tournament selection, ranking selection, and roulette wheel selection. The crossover
                                   operation selects two parents, recombines them, and creates two children. Crossover can
                                   be either single-point crossover or multi-point crossover. Crossover does not introduce
                                   any new genetic properties. Mutation operation introduces new genetic properties. These
                                   operations are repeated for a given number of generations (Bandyopadhyay & Coyle, 2003;
                                   Pantazis, Nikolidakis & Vergados, 2013). The implementation of various GA operations is
                                   explained below.

                                   i. Binary Coding: Binary coding scheme represents each chromosome for the given sensor
                                   scenario as a string of 0s and 1s . a chromosome of length N bits signiﬁes HWSNs with N
                                   nodes. The chromosome size is the same as the size of the network. In the chromosome set,
                                   value 1 and 0 represents the CH and CM, respectively. Figure 2 shows the chromosome
                                   representation of a network with 20 sensor nodes. Nodes S2 ; S3 ; S11 are CHs, and the
                                   remaining nodes are CMs.
                                   ii. Objective Function: The objective function (d) is used for selecting optimal CHs. In
                                   designing d, the following facts are considered. The optimal CH consumes more energy
                                   than the CM, so the number of CHs must be minimised. The power required for intra-
                                   cluster communication depends on the distance between CHs and CMs, and the power
                                   required for inter-cluster communication depends on the distance between two CHs. To
                                   save power, we have to reduce the size of optimal CHs ($), the distance between CHs and
                                   CMs (#), and the two CHs distance (s). By selecting CHs with higher residual energy, we
                                   can deliver packets reliably. The d selects the CHs by considering the above factors, and it
                                   is a minimisation function as given in Eq. (19).
                                         
                                          1
                                   d¼         þ#þsþ$                                                                      (19)
                                          u
                                   where, u represents the sum of the residual energy associated with the CHs.
                                        X
                                        $
                                   u¼          ui                                                                         (20)
                                         i¼1


                                      Eq. (21) determines the sum of the distance between CMs from their respective CHs.
                                        XX
                                        $
                                                          j
                                   #¼               dðCMi ; CHi Þ                                                         (21)
                                         i¼1 i2Ci



Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                 13/30
                                     Figure 2 Binary coding representation of a chromosome. The ﬁrst row represents sensor nodes and
                                     the second row represent their corresponding binary coding. The chromosome size is the same as the size
                                     of the network. In the chromosome set, value 1 and 0 represents the CH and CM, respectively.
                                                                                              Full-size  DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029/ﬁg-2


                                   where, CHi represents the ith CH, Ci denotes the set of CMs associated with CHi and CMj
                                   represents jth CM node associated with CHi .
                                      In Eq. (22), s represents the total distance between all the CHs in the ith level to the
                                   parent CH nodes in the i  1th level. The node level is considered to ﬁnd out the parent CH
                                   nodes. All the CHs in level 1 send packets to the destination directly. CHs in the remaining
                                   level send packets to their parent CHs in a multi-hop fashion to the sink, and CHs in
                                   i  1th level is the parent of CHs in the ith level.
                                            X
                                            $
                                   s¼                 dðCHi ; CHj Þ                                                                      (22)
                                          i¼1;j¼i1

                                   where j 2 Pi and Pi represents the set of parent CHs associated with CHi .

                                   iii. Fitness Function: GA is generally suitable for solving the maximisation problem. Since
                                   our aim is minimising d, this problem is transformed into maximising the ﬁtness value fv .
                                   For each chromosome in the population d is used to calculate the fv as given by Eq. (23).
                                           1
                                   fv ¼                                                                                                  (23)
                                          1þd
                                   iv. Selection: It is used to select chromosomes with higher fv to join the mating pool to
                                   form a new population for the subsequent generations. The proposed method uses the
                                   Roulette wheel selection method.
                                   v. Crossover: The proposed GA-EMC scheme uses a single-point crossover. A random
                                   value (0 to 1) and two chromosomes have been selected for this operation. The crossover
                                   operation is performed only if the selected random value is less than the crossover
                                   probability pc . Otherwise, no crossover is done. If it is decided to perform crossover, an
                                   arbitrary crossover point is selected. After the crossover point, the two-parent
                                   chromosomes exchange their packet to generate two child chromosomes. Table 3 shows
                                   the crossover operation.
                                   vi. Mutation: In bit-level mutation, a random value is chosen for every bit in a
                                   chromosome. Suppose this random value is less than Pm , then the mutation is performed
                                   to invert the bit. Otherwise, the bit is kept as such.

                                      As shown in Table 4, in the ﬁrst chromosome, no mutation is performed, whereas in the
                                   second chromosome, six bits are mutated.
                                      Selection, mutation, and crossover operations are repeated for given generations.
                                   The better chromosome is selected at the end of the last generation. In the best

Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                                14/30
                                   chromosome selection, if the genome value is 1, the node becomes CH, and otherwise, it
                                   becomes CM.

                                   GA-based clustering algorithm
                                     Begin
                                            Choose binary coding to represent chromosome
                                            Set values for population size
                                            Set values for cross over and mutation probability
                                            Set the maximum number of generations gmax
                                            Initialise generation counter g0
                                            Generate initial population
                                     while ðg < gmax Þ do
                                            Fitness function used for evaluating chromosomes in the population
                                            Perform reproduction
                                            Perform crossover
                                            Perform mutation
                                            Increment the generation counter by 1
                                     end while
                                            Get the best chromosome
                                     for i ¼ 1 to N
                                     if (chromosome ½i ¼ ¼ 1) then
                                            Get the position of the CH nodes
                                     for each CH do
                                            send CHADV message
                                            while the clustering timer has not expired
                                                 Receive JOIN message
                                     end while
                                     create and send TDMA schedule to CMs
                                     end for
                                     else
                                            While the clustering timer has not expired
                                                 Receive CHADV message
                                            add information about CHs in the CT
                                            end while
                                     for every record in the CT do
                                            Find cost
                                            JOIN the CH with minimum cost
                                            receive TDMA schedule from the CH and
                                                 transmit data according to it
                                     end for
                                     end if
                                     end for
                                     end



Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                            15/30
                                      Table 3 A single-point crossover.
                                     Parent chromosome                        Cross over point                 Child chromosome
                                     00010001110000000101                     16                               00010001110000001101
                                     00001001010000101101                     16                               00001001010000100101



                                      Table 4 Bit-level mutation.
                                     Chromosome before mutation                                          Chromosome after mutation
                                     00010001110000001101                                                00010001110000001101
                                     00001001010000100101                                                00001100010010100010


                                   Minimising end-to-end delay with packet forwarding mechanism
                                   Let s represent an upper limit on the delay with T ¼ f1; 2; :::;sg: A mathematical model is
                                   designed to analyse the number of data packets sent and received between CH and CMs for
                                   a particular time. We use the binary variables: wt ¼ 1 if time t 2 T; Zti;s ¼ 1 if node i 2 m is
                                   transmitting s 2 S in t 2 T; Yi;st ¼ 1 if node i 2 m is receiving s 2 S in t 2 T; jti;s ¼ 1 if s 2 S
                                   is present at i 2 m by t 2 T.
                                      GA-EMC is specially formulated to minimise the delay required to send packets from
                                   source to destination. The constraint wtþ1  wt ; t 2 Tnfsg has been forced all the time
                                                                        P t           
                                   after the ﬁrst round. The constraint    Zi;s þ Yi;s
                                                                                   t
                                                                                          wt ; i 2 v; t 2 T ensures that a node
                                                                             s2S
                                   can either send and receive data packets at a particular time or nothing to be done. The
                                              P t          P t
                                   constraint    Zi;s  1;   Yi;s  1; s 2 S; t 2 T ensures that, in time t, the data is
                                                  i2v          i2v
                                   transmitted by one node and received by another node in HWSNs. The constraint
                                    P t
                                        Zi;s  Yj;s
                                                t
                                                    ; j 2 V; s 2 S; t 2 T ensures that the node j receives a packet s in the current
                                   i2vðjÞ
                                                        P                P
                                   time. Inequality         Zti;s  1;
                                                                    t
                                                                   Yi;s  1; i 2 V; s 2 S allows a node to communicate data
                                                   i2T         t2T          P t           P t
                                   packets during the time. The constraint      Zi;s  1;    Yi;s  1; s 2 S; t 2 T is fully
                                                                                   i2v           i2v
                                   justiﬁed in transmitting packets through multi-hop routing. The constraints
                                           P
                                           t
                                   ati;s      T
                                             Yi;s ; s 2 S; i 2 VnfOðsÞg; t 2 T and a1OðsÞs ¼ 1; aTDðsÞs ¼ 1; s 2 S deﬁnes variable
                                            T¼1
                                   a and set the conditions for the starting and ending of the dynamic TDMA scheduling.
                                   Finally, the constraint Zti;s  ati;s ; i 2 V; s 2 S; t 2 T expresses the SINR state for sending
                                   data packets s on link ði; jÞ at a time t. Subsequently, the SINR state is stable when
                                   Zti;s ¼ Yj;s
                                            t
                                                ¼ 1 agreeing to the case when all nodes besides only node i is sending packets
                                                                                                                          P t
                                   in a network. Although, node j receives a data packets s from node i in a time t, then     w
                                                                                                                          t2T
                                   becomes equivalent to




Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                         16/30
                                      Table 5 The parameters and values for simulation.
                                     Parameters                                                                        Value
                                     Network area                                                                      800  800 m2
                                     Network size                                                                      400
                                     The initial energy of the normal node                                             0:5 Joule
                                     Packet size                                                                       4 KB
                                     g                                                                                 10 pJ=bit=m2
                                     c                                                                                 0:0013 pJ=bit
                                     q                                                                                 50 nJ=bit
                                     a and b                                                                           1 and 2
                                     Pm                                                                                0:6
                                     pc                                                                                0:03
                                     Population size                                                                   20
                                     Maximum generations                                                               20


                                                            X       X
                                   pði; jÞ  @ðb þ                            pðk; jgZtks Þ;                                       (24)
                                                          i2Vnfi;jg s2Snfsg
                                                                                                           P
                                   which accurately conﬁrms that the SINR value is met. In Eq. (24),                pðk; jgZtks Þ; is
                                                                                                          s2Snfsg
                                   valid since when Zti;s ¼ 1 then all the nodes besides i are illegal to send s in t since
                                   P t          P t
                                      Zi;s  1;   Yi;s  1; s 2 S; t 2 T.
                                   i2v              i2v
                                      We observe that the packet forwarding mechanism is used to increase the transmissions
                                   in HWSNs. In GA-EMC, the packet forwarding mechanism increases the transmissions at
                                   a particular time, and more data packets are transmitted to the CMs through adjacent
                                   clusters. This is possible for increasing the use of packet forwarding and forward
                                   interference cancellation mechanisms among CMs in all clusters in the ensuing time,
                                   which is more cooperative for minimising delay in HWSNs.

                                   RESULTS
                                   In this section, the performance of GA-EMC is analysed and compared with E-MDSP
                                   (Capone et al., 2019) and EEWC (Pal et al., 2020). Simulations are performed using the
                                   Network Simulator (NS2) (Issariyakul & Hossain, 2012). An HWSN consists of 400 nodes
                                   in a simulation area. To evaluate the GA-EMC performance, we have considered the
                                   metrics such as network lifetime, throughput, network stability, the number of data
                                   packets sent to the sink, and the average energy consumption in the whole network. The
                                   various parameters for simulation are presented in Table 5.

                                   Network lifetime
                                   To extend the HWSNs’ lifetime, we have considered the alive nodes in each round.
                                   Figure 3 illustrates that the proposed GA-EMC scheme extends the lifetime of alive nodes
                                   in every round than EEWC and E-MDSP. The proposed GA-EMC provides a better
                                   network lifetime than existing schemes.


Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                           17/30
                                     Figure 3 Number of rounds vs number of alive nodes. The X-axis represents the number of rounds,
                                     and Y-axis represents the number of alive sensor nodes. Green-line, red-line and blue-line represent
                                     proposed GA-EMC, E-MDSP and EEWC, respectively. Full-size  DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029/ﬁg-3




                                     Figure 4 Number of rounds vs throughput. The X-axis represents the number of rounds and Y-axis
                                     represents throughput. Green-line, red-line and blue-line represent proposed GA-EMC, E-MDSP and
                                     EEWC respectively. The EEWC performs poorly with less data packet communication. Similarly, the E-
                                     MDSP gives the best behaviour than EEWC and also provides poor performance than GA-EMC.
                                                                                               Full-size  DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029/ﬁg-4


                                      The proposed GA-EMC uses multi-hop communication for packet delivery to extend
                                   the network lifetime. Compared to the existing schemes, the ﬁrst node dies after 1,800
                                   rounds in GA-EMC. Later, the last node remains alive for 2,100 rounds. In EEWC and E-
                                   MDSP schemes, the nodes have died after 1,000 and 1,600 rounds, respectively. Figure 3
                                   shows that the proposed GA-EMC scheme prolongs the network lifetime and stability, and
                                   the last alive node can still respond to the network in this approach.

                                   Throughput
                                   In HWSNs, the proposed GA-EMC algorithm analysed the number of data packets sent,
                                   each CH sends data packets to the sink, and the CMs send data packets to their respective
                                   CHs. As shown in Fig. 4, the EEWC performs poorly with less data packet communication.
                                   Similarly, the E-MDSP gives the best behaviour than EEWC and also provides poor


Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                              18/30
                                     Figure 5 Number of rounds vs number of dead nodes. The X-axis represents the number of rounds,
                                     and Y-axis represents the number of dead nodes. Green-line, red-line and blue-line represent proposed
                                     GA-EMC, E-MDSP and EEWC, respectively. It shows the regular time interval from the beginning of the
                                     network process until the death of the ﬁrst node in HWSNs. The GA-EMC has a better stability period
                                     than the other schemes. The ﬁrst dead node starts at 1,800 rounds in the GA-EMC scheme, whereas the
                                     ﬁrst dead node starts nearly 1,000 and 1,600 rounds under the EEWC, E-MDSP approaches. The stability
                                     duration of GA-EMC compared with the EEWC scheme increases from 1,000 to 2,500 rounds, and the E-
                                     MDSP increases from 1,600 to 2,500 rounds. So, GA-EMC provides better stability duration and prolongs
                                     the network lifetime.                                      Full-size  DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029/ﬁg-5


                                   performance than GA-EMC. The number of data packets sent from CHs is increased
                                   signiﬁcantly by the EMC-GA and achieves better throughput when compared to the other
                                   schemes.

                                   Stability period
                                   Figure 5 illustrates the regular time interval from the beginning of the network process
                                   until the death of the ﬁrst node in HWSNs. As shown in Fig. 5, the GA-EMC has a better
                                   stability period than the other schemes. The ﬁrst dead node starts at 1,800 rounds in the
                                   GA-EMC scheme, whereas the ﬁrst dead node starts at nearly 1,000 and 1,600 rounds
                                   under the EEWC, E-MDSP approaches. The stability duration of GA-EMC compared with
                                   the EEWC scheme increases from 1,000 to 2,500 rounds, and the E-MDSP increases from
                                   1,600 to 2,500 rounds. So, GA-EMC provides better stability duration and prolongs the
                                   network lifetime.

                                   Minimising the end-to-end delay
                                   Figure 6 displays the analysis of various approaches in terms of delay. It shows that the
                                   EEWC acquires the extreme delay of 0.04 s in 2,500 rounds. However, the delay is low
                                   compared to EEWC, and it is maximum than the GA-EMC. At the same time, E-MDSP
                                   achieves a minimum delay than EEWC, but it fails to outperform GA-EMC. GA-EMC
                                   approach achieves a low delay of only 0.02 s at the 2,500 rounds.

                                   The average energy consumption
                                   Figure 7 displays the average energy consumption under variable simulation rounds.
                                      Even though more packets are transmitted in the proposed protocol than in EEWC and
                                   E-MDSP, the average energy consumption till a particular round is less in the proposed


Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                               19/30
                                     Figure 6 Number of rounds vs delay. The X-axis represents the number of rounds, and Y-axis
                                     represents the End-to-end Delay (in seconds). Green-line, red-line and blue-line represent proposed GA-
                                     EMC, E-MDSP and EEWC, respectively. The EEWC acquires the extreme delay of 0.04 s in 2,500 rounds.
                                     However, the delay is low when compared to EEWC, and it is maximum than the GA-EMC. At the same
                                     time, E-MDSP achieves a minimum delay than EEWC, but it fails to outperform GA-EMC. GA-EMC
                                     approach achieves a low delay of only 0.02 s at the 2,500 rounds.
                                                                                                Full-size  DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029/ﬁg-6




                                     Figure 7 Number of rounds vs average energy consumption. The X-axis represents the number of
                                     rounds, and Y-axis represents the average energy consumption under variable simulation rounds. Green-
                                     line, red-line and blue-line represent proposed GA-EMC, E-MDSP and EEWC, respectively. Even though
                                     more packets are transmitted in the proposed protocol than EEWC and E-MDSP, the average energy
                                     consumption till a particular round is less in the proposed GA-EMC.
                                                                                                Full-size  DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029/ﬁg-7


                                   GA-EMC, as shown in Figure 7. This energy-saving aims to use multi-hop communication
                                   and associate the CMs with the optimum CHs.

                                   Impact of sink node location on the HWSNs lifetime and stability
                                   Network stability is measured by the round when the ﬁrst node died. To study the impact
                                   of sink location on the network stability and lifetime, we have considered three scenarios.
                                   In scenarios 1, 2, and 3, the sink is situated at various places such as the middle, top right
                                   corner, and outside the ﬁeld, respectively. Table 6 showed the comparison of the round
                                   when a given percentage of nodes died for different sink positions. On average, the


Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                                20/30
  Table 6 Comparison of percentage of nodes died for different sink node locations.
 % of nodes    Number of rounds
 died
               Sink located at center 100, 100        Sink located at top right corner 200, 200          Sink located outside the ﬁeld 100, 300

               GA-EMC       E-MDSP        EEWC        GA-EMC            E-MDSP            EEWC           GA-EMC           E-MDSP          EEWC
 10            1,049        1,019         717         710               680               401            312              282             123
 20            1,192        11,62         922         824               794               564            534              504             256
 30            1,412        1,382         1,028       978               948               621            678              648             384
 40            1,554        1,524         1,087       1,126             1,096             789            756              726             490
 50            1,693        1,663         1,157       1,267             1,237             854            869              839             587
 60            1,765        1,735         1,245       1,398             1,368             981            1,023            993             712
 70            1,958        1,928         1,353       1,501             1,471             1,102          1,265            1,235           891
 80            2,196        2,166         1,521       1,689             1,659             1,256          1,412            1,382           1,038
 90            2,458        2,428         1,702       1,876             1,846             1,411          1,623            1,593           1,214
 100           2,641        2,611         1,813       2,123             2,093             1,714          1,831            1,801           1,485




                                          Figure 8 Comparing GA-EMC with EEWC and E-MDSP based on network lifetime. The X-axis
                                          represents each of three scenarios: i.e., the ﬁrst node died, the middle node died and the last node died.
                                          The Y-axis represents the rounds when the ﬁrst node died in the three scenarios. Green-bar, red-bars and
                                          blue-bars represent proposed GA-EMC, E-MDSP and EEWC, respectively.
                                                                                                        Full-size  DOI: 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029/ﬁg-8


                                       proposed protocol extends the round when the last node died by 30.94% by considering
                                       different sink positions. GA-EMC extends the network lifetime and better stability in all
                                       three cases, and it provides more signiﬁcant improvement when the sink is at the corner
                                       and outside the ﬁeld due to multi-hop routing.
                                          Figure 8 shows the rounds when the ﬁrst node died in the three scenarios. As shown in
                                       Fig. 8, the round when the ﬁrst node died is postponed by 10.98%, 23.47% and 46.94% in
                                       scenarios 1, 2 and 3, respectively. This shows that the proposed protocol performs better
                                       for longer distance transmission. Compared to EEWC and E-MDSP, the GA-EMC



Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                                          21/30
                                   provides a 27.13% improvement in the round when the ﬁrst node died, considering the
                                   average of different sink positions.

                                   DISCUSSION
                                   The proposed GA-EMC scheme outperforms the existing methods, especially EEWC and
                                   E-MDSP, in almost all aspects. It extends the lifetime of alive nodes in every round and
                                   prolongs the network lifetime and stability. Also, it signiﬁcantly increases the number of
                                   data packets sent from CHs and achieves better throughput. It provides better stability
                                   duration and prolongs the network lifetime.
                                      Furthermore, it achieves a lower delay and reduces the average energy consumption till
                                   a particular round. It extends the network lifetime and better stability in all three cases.
                                   Due to multi-hop routing, it improves when the sink is at the corner and outside the ﬁeld
                                   and performs better for longer distance transmission.

                                   CONCLUSIONS
                                   In this article, a GA-EMC scheme is presented for extending the lifetime and minimising
                                   the delay in HWSNs. In selecting the optimal CHs, the ﬁtness value is calculated based on
                                   cluster distances, the number of CHs, and their initial and residual energies. Each cluster
                                   selects a CH with minimum distance, higher residual energy, minimum CMs, and
                                   maximum neighbours as its next hop in inter-cluster routing. The energy hole problem
                                   created due to multipath routing is solved by deploying more higher energy supernodes in
                                   the areas closer to the sink. The mathematical model for energy consumption for clustering
                                   with multi-hop data transmission is explained. The experimental results proclaim that
                                   GA-EMC prolongs the HWSNs lifetime, minimises the delay, and maximises stability
                                   compared to EEWC and E-MDSP for various positions of the BS, primarily when the BS is
                                   situated in the network corner and outer area. The death of the ﬁrst and last nodes is
                                   prolonged by 27.13% and 30.94%, respectively, compared with EEWC and E-MDSP. In the
                                   future, the simulation can be repeated to see the impact of the number of nodes in HWSNs.
                                   Also, the performance of GA_EMC can be analysed in actual (not simulated) HWSNs in
                                   some practical scenarios.

                                   ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
                                   We thank reviewers, editors and publishers for providing valuable feedback to improve the
                                   manuscript. We also appreciate Vija Prakash for helping us with formatting.

                                    ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AND DECLARATIONS

                                   Funding
                                   The work was funded by NICE-Healthcare, Research Excellence Funds by The University
                                   of Malta. There was no additional external funding received for this study. The funders had
                                   no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of
                                   the manuscript.



Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                  22/30
                                   Grant Disclosures
                                   The following grant information was disclosed by the authors:
                                   NICE-Healthcare.
                                   Research Excellence Funds by the University of Malta.

                                   Competing Interests
                                   Lalit Garg & NZ Jhanjhi are Academic Editors for PeerJ.

                                   Author Contributions
                                    R. Muthukkumar conceived and designed the experiments, performed the experiments,
                                     prepared ﬁgures and/or tables, authored or reviewed drafts of the article, and approved
                                     the ﬁnal draft.
                                    Lalit Garg analyzed the data, prepared ﬁgures and/or tables, authored or reviewed drafts
                                     of the article, and approved the ﬁnal draft.
                                    K. Maharajan performed the experiments, analyzed the data, performed the
                                     computation work, prepared ﬁgures and/or tables, and approved the ﬁnal draft.
                                    M. Jayalakshmi performed the experiments, analyzed the data, performed the
                                     computation work, prepared ﬁgures and/or tables, and approved the ﬁnal draft.
                                    Nz Jhanjhi performed the computation work, prepared ﬁgures and/or tables, authored or
                                     reviewed drafts of the article, and approved the ﬁnal draft.
                                    S. Parthiban analyzed the data, prepared ﬁgures and/or tables, authored or reviewed
                                     drafts of the article, and approved the ﬁnal draft.
                                    G. Saritha analyzed the data, prepared ﬁgures and/or tables, authored or reviewed drafts
                                     of the article, and approved the ﬁnal draft.

                                   Data Availability
                                   The following information was supplied regarding data availability:
                                     The code is available in the Supplemental File.

                                   Supplemental Information
                                   Supplemental information for this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/10.7717/
                                   peerj-cs.1029#supplemental-information.


                                   REFERENCES
                                   Abo-Zahhad M, Ahmed SM, Sabor N, Sasaki S. 2014. A new energy-efﬁcient adaptive clustering
                                     protocol based on genetic algorithm for improving the lifetime and the stable period of wireless
                                     sensor networks. International Journal of Energy, Information and Communications 5(3):47–72
                                     DOI 10.14257/ijeic.2014.5.3.05.
                                   Abo-Zahhad M, Farrag M, Ali A, Amin O. 2015. An energy consumption model for wireless
                                     sensor networks. In: 5th International Conference on Energy Aware Computing Systems &
                                     Applications. Cairo, Egypt. 1–4.
                                   Afsar MM, Mohammad H, Tayarani N. 2014. Clustering in sensor networks: a literature survey.
                                     Journal of Network and Computer Applications 46(4):198–226 DOI 10.1016/j.jnca.2014.09.005.




Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                       23/30
                                   Agrawal A, Garg L, Audu EE, Pachori RB, Dauwels J. 2019. Early detection of epileptic seizures
                                     based on scalp EEG signals. In: Hegadi RS, Santosh KC, eds. Medical Imaging: Use of AI, Image
                                     Recognition and Machine Learning Techniques. Boca Raton: CRC Press.
                                   Agrawal A, Garg L, Dauwels J. 2013. Application of empirical mode decomposition algorithm for
                                      epileptic seizure detection from scalp EEG. Transactions of Japanese Society for Medical and
                                      Biological Engineering 51:R-207 DOI 10.11239/jsmbe.51.R-207.
                                   Akyildiz IF, Su W, Sankarasubramaniam Y, Cayirci E. 2002. Wireless sensor networks: a survey.
                                      Computer Networks 38(4):393–422 DOI 10.1016/S1389-1286(01)00302-4.
                                   Ali H, Shahzad W, Khan FA. 2012. Energy-efﬁcient clustering in mobile ad-hoc networks using
                                      multi-objective particle swarm optimisation. Applied Soft Computing 12(7):1913–1928
                                      DOI 10.1016/j.asoc.2011.05.036.
                                   Amgoth T, Jana PK. 2015. Energy-aware routing algorithm for wireless sensor networks.
                                     Computers & Electrical Engineering 41:357–367 DOI 10.1016/j.compeleceng.2014.07.010.
                                   Andrushia AD, Paul JJ, Sagayam KM, Grace SR, Garg L. 2021. Spy-Bot: controlling and
                                     monitoring a Wi-Fi-controlled surveillance robotic car using windows 10 IoT and cloud
                                     computing. In: Blockchain Technology for Data Privacy Management. Boca Raton: CRC Press,
                                     37–59.
                                   Attea BA, Khalil EA. 2012. A new evolutionary based routing protocol for clustered heterogeneous
                                      wireless sensor networks. Applied Soft Computing 12(7):1950–1957
                                      DOI 10.1016/j.asoc.2011.04.007.
                                   Audu EE, Garg L, Falzon O, Di Giovanni G. 2017a. EEG feature extraction using common spatial
                                      pattern with spectral graph decomposition. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
                                      on Computing, Networking and Informatics (ICCNI 2017). Canaanland, Ota, Ogun State,
                                      Nigeria: Covenant University. Piscataway: IEEE.
                                   Audu EE, Garg L, Falzon O, Giovanni GD. 2017b. Applications of machine learning in energy
                                     efﬁcient, real-time, monitoring, prediction, detection and management of seizure. In:
                                     Localization Localisation of Abnormal (Seizure) EEG Source, Mediterranean Neuroscience
                                     Society – 6th Conference 2017. St Julian’s, Malta.
                                   Bandyopadhyay S, Coyle EJ. 2003. An energy efﬁcient hierarchical clustering algorithm for
                                     wireless sensor networks. In: IEEE INFOCOM 2003. Twenty-Second Annual Joint Conference of
                                     the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies. Vol. 3. San Francisco. Piscataway: IEEE,
                                     1713–1723.
                                   Bari A, Jaekel A, Bandyopadhyay S. 2008. Clustering strategies for improving the lifetime of two-
                                     tiered sensor networks. Computer Communications 31(14):3451–3459
                                     DOI 10.1016/j.comcom.2008.05.038.
                                   Bayrakli S, Erdogan SN. 2012. Genetic algorithm based energy efﬁcient clusters (GABEEC) in
                                     wireless sensor networks. Procedia Computer Science 10:247–254
                                     DOI 10.1016/j.procs.2012.06.034.
                                   Bencan G, Tingyao J, X.Shouzhi X, Peng C. 2013. An energy-heterogeneous clustering scheme to
                                     avoid energy holes in wireless sensor networks. International Journal of Distributed Sensor
                                     Networks 9(10):796549 DOI 10.1155/2013/796549.
                                   Bhattacharyya A, Tripathy RK, Garg L, Pachori RB. 2021. A novel multivariate-multiscale
                                     approach for computing EEG spectral and temporal complexity for human emotion recognition.
                                     IEEE Sensors Journal 21(3):3579–3591 DOI 10.1109/JSEN.2020.3027181.
                                   Bhushan S, Pal R, Antoshchuk SG. 2018. Energy efﬁcient clustering protocol for heterogeneous
                                     wireless sensor network: a hybrid approach using GA and K-means. In: Proceedings of the IEEE




Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                       24/30
                                     International Conference on Data Stream Mining and Processing, DSMP. Ukraine. Piscataway:
                                     IEEE, 381–385.
                                   Bonello J, Garg L, Garg G, Audu EE. 2018. Effective data acquisition for machine learning
                                     algorithm in EEG signal processing. In: Soft Computing: Theories and Applications. Singapore:
                                     Springer, 233–244.
                                   Bugeja S, Garg L. 2015. Application of machine learning techniques for the modelling of eeg data
                                     for diagnosis of Epileptic Seizures. In: The 3rd Workshop on Recognition and Action for Scene
                                     Understanding (REACTS 2015). Valletta, Malta.
                                   Bugeja S, Garg L, Audu EE. 2016. A novel method of EEG data acquisition, feature extraction and
                                     feature space creation for Early Detection of Epileptic Seizures. In: 38th Annual International
                                     Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC-2016). Orlando,
                                     Florida USA. Piscataway: IEEE.
                                   Capone A, Li Y, Pioro M, Yuan D. 2019. Minimizing end-to-end delay in multi-hop wireless
                                     networks with optimized transmission scheduling. Ad Hoc Networks 89(6):236–248
                                     DOI 10.1016/j.adhoc.2019.01.004.
                                   Chakraborty C, Banerjee A, Garg L, Coelho Rodrigues JJP. 2020a. Internet of medical things for
                                     smart healthcare: COVID-19 pandemic, book series: studies in big data. Singapore: Springer.
                                   Chakraborty C, Banerjee A, Kolekar MH, Garg L. 2020b. Internet of things for healthcare
                                     technologies, studies in big data. Vol. 73. Singapore: Springer.
                                   Chang Y, Yuan X, Li B, Niyato D, Al-Dhahir N. 2018. A joint unsupervised learning and genetic
                                     algorithm approach for topology control in energy-efﬁcient ultra-dense wireless sensor
                                     networks. IEEE Communications Letters 22(11):2370–2373
                                     DOI 10.1109/LCOMM.2018.2870886.
                                   Chang Y, Yuan X, Li B, Niyato D, Al-Dhahir N. 2019. Machine-learning-based parallel genetic
                                     algorithms for multi-objective optimisation in ultra-reliable low-latency WSNs. IEEE Access
                                     7:4913–4926 DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2885934.
                                   Chauhan V, Soni S. 2021. Energy aware unequal clustering algorithm with multi-hop routing via
                                     low degree relay nodes for wireless sensor networks. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and
                                     Humanized Computing 12(2):2469–2482 DOI 10.1007/s12652-020-02385-1.
                                   Chukwu E, Garg L, Zahra R. 2021. Internet of health things: opportunities and challenges. In:
                                     Chakraborty U, Banerjee A, Saha JK, Sarkar N, Chakraborty C, eds. Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the
                                     Fourth Industrial Revolution. Singapore: Jenny Stanford Publishing.
                                   Darabkh KA, Zomot JN, Al-qudah Z. 2019. EDB-CHS-BOF: energy and distance-based cluster
                                     head selection with balanced objective function protocol. IET Communications 13(19):3168–
                                     3180 DOI 10.1049/iet-com.2019.0092.
                                   Delavar AG, Baradaran AA. 2012. CRCWSN: presenting a routing algorithm by using re-
                                     clustering to reduce energy consumption in WSN. International Journal of Computers
                                     Communications & Control 8(1):61–69 DOI 10.15837/ijccc.2013.1.169.
                                   Deng L, Gui J, Wang T, Tan J, Li X. 2021. An intelligent hybrid MAC protocol for a sensor-based
                                     personalised healthcare system. Digital Communications and Networks 8(2):174–185
                                     DOI 10.1016/j.dcan.2021.08.004.
                                   Elhoseny M, Yuan X, Yu Z, Mao C, El-Minir HK, Riad AM. 2015. Balancing energy consumption
                                      in heterogeneous wireless sensor networks using genetic algorithm. IEEE Communications
                                      Letters 19(12):2194–2197 DOI 10.1109/LCOMM.2014.2381226.
                                   Fan C-S. 2013. Rich: region-based intelligent cluster-head selection and node deployment strategy
                                     in concentric-based WSNs. Advances in Electrical and Computer Engineering 13(4):3–8
                                     DOI 10.4316/aece.


Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                       25/30
                                   Fanian F, Rafsanjani MK. 2019. Cluster-based routing protocols in wireless sensor networks: a
                                     survey based on methodology. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 142(14):111–142
                                     DOI 10.1016/j.jnca.2019.04.021.
                                   Garg L, Chukwu E, Nidal N, Chakraborty C, Garg G. 2020a. Anonymity preserving IoT-based
                                     COVID-19 and other infectious disease contact tracing model. IEEE Access 8:159402–159414
                                     DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3020513.
                                   Garg L, Ramesh K, Garg G, Portelli A, Jamal A. 2020b. Kitchen genie: an intelligent internet of
                                     things system for household inventory management. In: Singh P, Panigrahi B, Suryadevara N,
                                     Sharma S, Singh A, eds. Proceedings of ICETIT 2019. Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering. Vol.
                                     605. Cham: Springer.
                                   Gupta V, Pandey R. 2016. An improved energy aware distributed unequal clustering protocol for
                                     heterogeneous wireless sensor networks. Engineering Science and Technology, An International
                                     Journal 19(2):1050–1058 DOI 10.1016/j.jestch.2015.12.015.
                                   Haseeb K, Islam N, Almogren A, Din IUd, Almajed HN, Guizani N. 2019. Secret sharing-based
                                     energy-aware and multi-hop routing protocol for IoT based WSNs. IEEE Access 7:79980–79988
                                     DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2922971.
                                   Heinzelman WR, Chandrakasan A, Balakrishnan H. 2000. Energy-efﬁcient communication
                                     protocol for wireless microsensor networks. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Hawaii
                                     International Conference on System Sciences. 10.
                                   Hoang DC, Yadav P, Kumar R, Panda SK. 2014. Real-time implementation of a harmony search
                                     algorithm-based clustering protocol for energy-efﬁcient wireless sensor networks. IEEE
                                     Transactions on Industrial Informatics 10(1):774–783 DOI 10.1109/TII.2013.2273739.
                                   Huang C, Huang G, Liu W, Wang R, Xie M. 2021. A parallel joint optimised relay selection
                                     protocol for wake-up radio enabled WSNs. Physical Communication 47(3):101320
                                     DOI 10.1016/j.phycom.2021.101320.
                                   Issariyakul T, Hossain E. 2012. Introduction to network simulator 2 (NS2). 2nd Edition. Boston,
                                      MA: Springer.
                                   Javaid N, Qureshi TN, Khan AH, Iqbal A, Akhtar E, Ishfaq M. 2013a. EDDEEC: enhanced
                                      developed distributed energy-efﬁcient clustering for heterogeneous wireless sensor networks.
                                      Procedia Computer Science 19:914–919 DOI 10.1016/j.procs.2013.06.125.
                                   Javaid N, Waseem M, Khan ZA, Qasim U, Latif K, Javaid A. 2013b. ACH: away cluster heads
                                      scheme for energy efﬁcient clustering protocols in WSNs. Saudi International Electronics,
                                      Communications and Photonics Conference, Fira 29:1–4 DOI 10.1109/SIECPC.2013.6550972.
                                   Jayalakshmi M, Garg L, Maharajan K, Srinivasan K, Jayakumar K, Bashir AK, Ramesh K. 2021.
                                      Fuzzy logic-based health monitoring system for COVID’19 patients. Computers, Materials &
                                      Continua 67(2):2431–2447 DOI 10.32604/cmc.2021.015352.
                                   Jin R-C, Gao T, Song J-Y, Zou J-Y, Wang L-D. 2013. Passive cluster-based multipath routing
                                      protocol for wireless sensor networks. Wireless Networks 19(8):1851–1866
                                      DOI 10.1007/s11276-013-0570-4.
                                   Jin M-H, Liu W-Z, Hsu DF, Kao C-Y. 2005. Compact genetic algorithm for performance
                                      improvement in hierarchical sensor networks management. In: 8th International Symposium on
                                      Parallel Architectures, Algorithms and Networks (ISPAN’05). Las Vegas, USA.
                                   Kachitvichyanukul V. 2012. Comparison of three evolutionary algorithms: GA, PSO, and DE.
                                     Industrial Engineering & Management Systems 11(3):215–223
                                     DOI 10.7232/IEMS.2012.11.3.215.




Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                        26/30
                                   Kalaimani D, Zah Z, Vashist S. 2020. Energy-efﬁcient density-based fuzzy C-means clustering in
                                     WSN for smart grids. Australian Journal of Multi-Disciplinary Engineering 4(5):1–16
                                     DOI 10.1080/14488388.2020.1811454.
                                   Kamil AA, Naji MK, Turki HA. 2020. Design and implementation of grid based clustering in
                                     WSN using dynamic sink node. Bulletin of Electrical Engineering and Informatics 9(5):2055–
                                     2064 DOI 10.11591/eei.v9i5.1875.
                                   Kashyap PK, Kumar S, Dohare U, Kumar V, Kharel R. 2019. Green computing in sensors-
                                     enabled internet of things: neuro fuzzy logic-based load balancing. Electronics 8(4):1–22
                                     DOI 10.3390/electronics8040384.
                                   Kumar D, Aseri TC, Patel RB. 2009. EEHC: energy efﬁcient heterogeneous clustered scheme for
                                     wireless sensor networks. Computer Communications 32(4):662–667
                                     DOI 10.1016/j.comcom.2008.11.025.
                                   Kumar R, Goel S, Sharma V, Garg L, Srinivasan K, Julka N. 2020. A multifaceted vigilare system
                                     for intelligent transportation services in smart cities. IEEE Internet of Things Magazine 3(4):76–
                                     80 DOI 10.1109/IOTM.0001.2000041.
                                   Kumar R, Kumar D. 2016. Multi-objective fractional artiﬁcial bee colony algorithm to energy
                                     aware routing protocol in wireless sensor network. Wireless Networks 22(5):1461–1474
                                     DOI 10.1007/s11276-015-1039-4.
                                   Lanzolla A, Spadavecchia M. 2021. Wireless sensor networks for environmental monitoring.
                                      Sensors 21(4):1172 DOI 10.3390/s21041172.
                                   Lin Y, Zhang J, Chung HS-H, Ip WH, Li Y, Shi Y-H. 2012. An ant colony optimization approach
                                      for maximising the lifetime of heterogeneous wireless sensor networks. IEEE Transactions on
                                      Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews) 42(3):408–420
                                      DOI 10.1109/TSMCC.2011.2129570.
                                   Liu JS, Lin CHR. 2005. Energy-efﬁciency clustering protocol in wireless sensor networks. Ad Hoc
                                      Networks 3(3):371–388 DOI 10.1016/j.adhoc.2003.09.012.
                                   Liu J, Ravishankar CV. 2011. LEACH-GA: genetic algorithm-based energy-efﬁcient adaptive
                                      clustering protocol for wireless sensor networks. International Journal of Machine Learning and
                                      Computing 1(1):79–85 DOI 10.7763/IJMLC.2011.V1.12.
                                   Mahajan S, Malhotra J, Sharma S. 2014. An energy balanced QoS based cluster head selection
                                     strategy for WSN. Egyptian Informatics Journal 15(3):189–199 DOI 10.1016/j.eij.2014.09.001.
                                   Mangion RS, Garg L, Garg G, Falzon O. 2020. Emotional testing on facebook’s user experience.
                                     IEEE Access 8:58250–58259 DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2981418.
                                   Mann PS, Singh S. 2017. Improved metaheuristic based energy-efﬁcient clustering protocol for
                                     wireless sensor networks. Engineering Applications of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 57(4):142–152
                                     DOI 10.1016/j.engappai.2016.10.014.
                                   Mehta K, Pal R. 2017. Biogeography based optimisation protocol for energy efﬁcient evolutionary
                                     algorithm: (BBO: EEEA). In: Proceedings of International Conference on Computing and
                                     Communication Technologies for Smart Nation (IC3TSN). Gurgaon, India, 281–286.
                                   Mhemed R, Aslam N, Phillips W, Comeau F. 2012. An energy efﬁcient fuzzy logic cluster
                                      formation protocol in wireless sensor networks. Procedia Computer Science 10:255–262
                                      DOI 10.1016/j.procs.2012.06.035.
                                   Pal R, Saraswat M. 2017. Data clustering using enhanced biogeography-based optimisation. In:
                                      Proceedings of Tenth International Conference on Contemporary Computing (IC3). Noida, 1–6.
                                   Pal R, Yadav S, Karnwal R, Aarti. 2020. EEWC: energy-efﬁcient weighted clustering method
                                      based on genetic algorithm for HWSNs. Complex & Intelligent Systems 6(2):391–400
                                      DOI 10.1007/s40747-020-00137-4.


Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                         27/30
                                   Pal V, Yogita, Singh G, Yadav RP. 2015a. Effect of heterogeneous nodes location on the
                                      performance of clustering algorithms for wireless sensor networks. Procedia Computer Science
                                      57:1042–1048 DOI 10.1016/j.procs.2015.07.376.
                                   Pal V, Yogita, Singh G, Yadav RP. 2015b. Cluster head selection optimization based on genetic
                                      algorithm to prolong lifetime of wireless sensor networks. Procedia Computer Science 57:1417–
                                      1423 DOI 10.1016/j.procs.2015.07.461.
                                   Pantazis NA, Nikolidakis SA, Vergados DD. 2013. Energy-efﬁcient routing protocols in wireless
                                      sensor networks: a survey. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials 15(2):551–591
                                      DOI 10.1109/SURV.2012.062612.00084.
                                   Prabaharan G, Jayashri S. 2019. Mobile cluster head selection using soft computing technique in
                                     wireless sensor network. Soft Computing 23(18):8525–8538 DOI 10.1007/s00500-019-04133-w.
                                   Qing L, Zhu Q, Wang M. 2006. Design of a distributed energy-efﬁcient clustering algorithm for
                                     heterogeneous wireless sensor networks. Computer Communications 29(12):2230–2237
                                     DOI 10.1016/j.comcom.2006.02.017.
                                   Rajpoot P, Dwivedi P. 2019. Multiple parameter based energy balanced and optimised clustering
                                     for WSN to enhance the lifetime using MADM approaches. Wireless Personal Communications
                                     106(2):829–877 DOI 10.1007/s11277-019-06192-6.
                                   Rakhee, Srinivas MB. 2016. Cluster based energy efﬁcient routing protocol using ANT colony
                                      optimization and breadth ﬁrst search. Procedia Computer Science 89(1):124–133
                                      DOI 10.1016/j.procs.2016.06.019.
                                   Saini P, Sharma AK. 2010. E-DEEC- enhanced distributed energy efﬁcient clustering scheme for
                                      heterogeneous WSN. In: First International Conference on Parallel, Distributed and Grid
                                      Computing (PDGC 2010). Solan, 205–210.
                                   Salankar N, Mishra P, Garg L. 2021. Emotion recognition from EEG signals using empirical mode
                                      decomposition and second-order difference plot. Biomedical Signal Processing and Control
                                      65(8):102389 DOI 10.1016/j.bspc.2020.102389.
                                   Sampathkumar A, Murugan S, Elngar AA, Garg L, Kanmani R, Malar ACJ. 2020. A novel
                                      scheme for an IoT-based weather monitoring system using a wireless sensor network. In: Rani S,
                                      Maheswar R, Kanagachidambaresan G, Jayarajan P, eds. Integration of WSN and IoT for Smart
                                      Cities. EAI/Springer Innovations in Communication and Computing. Cham: Springer.
                                   Sant A, Garg L, Xuereb PA, Chakraborty C. 2021. A novel green IoT-based pay-as-you-go smart
                                     parking system. Computers, Materials & Continua 67(3):3523–3544
                                     DOI 10.32604/cmc.2021.015265.
                                   Sarkar A, Senthil Murugan T. 2019. Cluster head selection for energy efﬁcient and delay-less
                                      routing in wireless sensor network. Wireless Networks 25(1):303–320
                                      DOI 10.1007/s11276-017-1558-2.
                                   Shang F. 2013. A multi-hop routing algorithm based on integrated metrics for wireless sensor
                                     networks. Applied Mathematics & Information Sciences 7(3):1021–1034
                                     DOI 10.12785/amis/070321.
                                   Singh B, Lobiyal DK. 2012a. A novel energy-aware cluster head selection based on particle swarm
                                      optimisation for wireless sensor networks. Human-centric Computing and Information Sciences
                                      2(1):1–18 DOI 10.1186/2192-1962-2-13.
                                   Singh B, Lobiyal DK. 2012b. Energy-aware cluster head selection using particle swarm
                                      optimization and analysis of packet retransmissions in WSN. Procedia Technology 4(4):171–176
                                      DOI 10.1016/j.protcy.2012.05.025.
                                   Smaragdakis G, Matta I, Bestavros A. 2004. SEP: a stable election protocol for clustered
                                     heterogeneous wireless sensor networks. In: SANPA.


Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                      28/30
                                   Tabatabaei S. 2020. A novel fault tolerance energy-aware clustering method via social spider
                                     optimization (SSO) and fuzzy logic and mobile sink in wireless sensor networks (WSNs).
                                     Computer Systems Science and Engineering 35(6):477–494 DOI 10.32604/csse.2020.35.477.
                                   Tanwar S, Kumar N, Rodrigues JJPC. 2015. A systematic review on heterogeneous routing
                                     protocols for wireless sensor network. Journal of Network and Computer Applications 53(8):39–
                                     56 DOI 10.1016/j.jnca.2015.03.004.
                                   Toor AS, Jain AK. 2019. Energy aware cluster based multi-hop energy efﬁcient routing protocol
                                     using multiple mobile nodes (MEACBM) in wireless sensor networks. AEU - International
                                     Journal of Electronics and Communications 102(5):41–53 DOI 10.1016/j.aeue.2019.02.006.
                                   Tyagi S, Kumar N. 2013. A systematic review on clustering and routing techniques based upon
                                     LEACH protocol for wireless sensor networks. Journal of Network and Computer Applications
                                     36(2):623–645 DOI 10.1016/j.jnca.2012.12.001.
                                   Vijayalakshmi K, Anandan P. 2020. Global levy ﬂight of cuckoo search with particle swarm
                                      optimization for effective cluster head selection in wireless sensor network. Intelligent
                                      Automation & Soft Computing 26(2):303–311 DOI 10.31209/2020.100000165.
                                   Wang J, Gao Y, Yin X, Li F, Kim H-J. 2018a. An enhanced PEGASIS algorithm with mobile sink
                                    support for wireless sensor networks. Wireless Communications & Mobile Computing
                                    2018:9472075 DOI 10.1155/2018/9472075.
                                   Wang J, Gao Y, Zhou C, Simon Sherratt R, Wang L. 2020. Optimal coverage multi-path
                                    scheduling scheme with multiple mobile sinks for WSNs. Computers, Materials & Continua
                                    62(2):695–711 DOI 10.32604/cmc.2020.08674.
                                   Wang J, Han H, Li H, He S, Kumar Sharma P, Chen L. 2022. Multiple strategies differential
                                    privacy on sparse tensor factorization for network trafﬁc analysis in 5G. IEEE Transactions on
                                    Industrial Informatics 18(3):1939–1948 DOI 10.1109/TII.2021.3082576.
                                   Wang J, Ju C, Gao Y, Sangaiah AK, Kim G. 2018b. A PSO based energy efﬁcient coverage control
                                    algorithm for wireless sensor networks. Computers, Materials & Continua 56(3):433–446
                                    DOI 10.3970/cmc.2018.04132.
                                   Wei D, Jin Y, Vural S, Moessner K, Tafazolli R. 2011. An energy-efﬁcient clustering solution for
                                     wireless sensor networks. IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications 10(11):3973–3983
                                     DOI 10.1109/TWC.2011.092011.110717.
                                   Younis O, Fahmy S. 2004. HEED: a hybrid, energy-efﬁcient, distributed clustering approach for ad
                                     hoc sensor networks. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing 3(4):366–379
                                     DOI 10.1109/TMC.2004.41.
                                   Younis M, Youssef M, Arisha K. 2003. Energy-aware management for cluster-based sensor
                                     networks. Computer Networks 43(5):649–668 DOI 10.1016/S1389-1286(03)00305-0.
                                   Yu J, Qi Y, Wang G, Gu X. 2012. A cluster-based routing protocol for wireless sensor networks
                                     with nonuniform node distribution. AEU - International Journal of Electronics and
                                     Communications 66(1):54–61 DOI 10.1016/j.aeue.2011.05.002.
                                   Yu J, Qi Y, Wang G, Guo Q, Gu X. 2011. An energy-aware distributed unequal clustering protocol
                                     for wireless sensor networks. International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks 7(1):202145
                                     DOI 10.1155/2011/202145.
                                   Zhang W, Li L, Han G, Zhang L. 2017. E2HRC: an energy-efﬁcient heterogeneous ring clustering
                                     routing protocol for wireless sensor networks. IEEE Access 5:1702–1713
                                     DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2666818.
                                   Zhang X, Zhang J, Gong Y, Zhan Z, Chen W, Li Y. 2016. Kuhn-Munkres parallel genetic
                                     algorithm for the set cover problem and its application to large-scale wireless sensor networks.



Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                       29/30
                                     IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation 20(5):695–710
                                     DOI 10.1109/TEVC.2015.2511142.
                                   Zhang Y, Zhang X, Ning S, Gao J, Liu Y. 2019. Energy-efﬁcient multilevel heterogeneous routing
                                     protocol for wireless sensor networks. IEEE Access 7:55873–55884
                                     DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2900742.
                                   Zhou H, Wu Y, Hu Y, Xie G. 2010. A novel stable selection and reliable transmission protocol for
                                     clustered heterogeneous wireless sensor networks. Computer Communications 33(15):1843–
                                     1849 DOI 10.1016/j.comcom.2010.06.001.




Muthukkumar et al. (2022), PeerJ Comput. Sci., DOI 10.7717/peerj-cs.1029                                                     30/30
