Article                                                               Not peer-reviewed version



A Two-Phase Genetic Algorithm
Approach for Sleep Scheduling,
Routing, and Clustering in
Heterogeneous Wireless Sensor
Networks


Sarah Abdulelah Abbas , Leili Farzinvash * , Mina Zolfy

Posted Date: 5 September 2025

doi: 10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1

Keywords: heterogeneous wireless sensor networks; genetic algorithm; sleep scheduling; routing; clustering




             Preprints.org is a free multidisciplinary platform providing preprint service
             that is dedicated to making early versions of research outputs permanently
             available and citable. Preprints posted at Preprints.org appear in Web of
             Science, Crossref, Google Scholar, Scilit, Europe PMC.

Copyright: This open access article is published under a Creative Commons CC BY 4.0
license, which permit the free download, distribution, and reuse, provided that the author
and preprint are cited in any reuse.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                             doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1

Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions, and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual author(s) and
contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting
from any ideas, methods, instructions, or products referred to in the content.

                  Article

                  A Two-Phase Genetic Algorithm Approach for Sleep
                  Scheduling, Routing, and Clustering in
                  Heterogeneous Wireless Sensor Networks
                  Sarah Abdulelah Abbas, Leili Farzinvash * and Mina Zolfy

                  Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Tabriz, Tabriz, Iran
                  * Correspondence: l.farzinvash@tabrizu.ac.ir

                  Abstract

                  Heterogeneous Wireless Sensor Networks (HWSNs), which comprises super nodes and normal
                  sensors, offer a promising solution for monitoring diverse environments. However, their practical
                  deployment is constrained by the limited battery life of sensors. To address this issue, clustering and
                  routing techniques have been employed to conserve energy. Nevertheless, existing approaches often
                  struggle suboptimal energy distribution, limited network lifetime, and weak network coverage.
                  Additionally, they mostly failed to exploit other energy saving techniques such as sleep scheduling.
                  This paper proposes a novel Genetic Algorithm (GA)-based approach to optimize sleep scheduling,
                  routing, and clustering in HWSNs. The method comprises two phases, namely join sleep scheduling
                  and routing tree construction, and clustering of normal nodes. Inspired from the concept of unequal
                  clustering, the HWSN is split into some rings in the first phase, and the number of awake super nodes
                  in each ring keeps the same. This approach addresses the challenges of balancing energy
                  consumption, enhancing energy efficiency, and network lifetime. Furthermore, including network
                  coverage and energy-related criteria in the proposed GA yields long-lasting network operation.
                  Through rigorous simulations, we demonstrate that our proposed algorithm reduces energy
                  consumption and network coverage by 16.7% and 24.9%, respectively, and extends network lifetime
                  by 532 rounds.

                  Keywords: heterogeneous wireless sensor networks; genetic algorithm; sleep scheduling; routing;
                  clustering



                  1. Introduction
                       Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) have emerged as a cost-effective solution for monitoring
                  diverse environments, particularly in harsh conditions. However, their practical deployment is
                  significantly constrained by the limited energy of sensor nodes, which impacts network lifetime and
                  data delivery. To address this challenge, Heterogeneous Wireless Sensor Networks (HWSNs) have
                  been proposed [1–3]. These networks consist of two types of nodes; namely, normal sensors and
                  super nodes [4,5]. Normal nodes, which have less energy are tasked to monitor the environment.
                  Super nodes, on the other hand, collect data from normal nodes, aggregate it, and transmit it to the
                  Base Station (BS). By incorporating more powerful super nodes as Cluster Heads (CHs), HWSNs can
                  enhance energy efficiency, extend network coverage, and improve data gathering capabilities.
                       As the assigned tasks of super nodes requires, these nodes experience significantly higher
                  energy consumption compared to their counterparts. Consequently, they often exhibit short lifetimes.
                  Therefore, achieving energy-efficient data gathering in HWSNs, aiming energy saving of super
                  nodes, has been a central focus of research. Strategies such as clustering aim to minimize data
                  transmission volumes by consolidating data amount at CHs [6,7]. Conversely, routing protocols
                  prioritize network longevity by balancing workloads across super nodes to prevent individual
                  overload [2]. The other effective way to increase network lifetime is to apply sleep scheduling



              © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                               2 of 22



              methods to super nodes [6]. This scheme decides that some nodes are awake and perform their tasks
              while others go to sleep and save their energy for later uses. By alternating between awake and sleep
              modes, sleep scheduling can significantly reduce energy consumption, prolonging the overall
              network lifetime. Additionally, sleep scheduling makes it possible to maintain adequate normal node
              coverage which ultimately results in enhancing network coverage even with a reduced number of
              awake nodes.
                    While prior studies have investigated clustering, routing, and sleep scheduling methods in
              HWSNs, these approaches have been examined in isolation, without exploring their potential
              through an integrated framework. These works relied on simplistic or suboptimal strategies to
              address energy conservation, with fragmented efforts targeting individual aspects: either clustering
              [8], routing [9,10], clustering and routing [5,11,12], or sleep scheduling [13]. Notably, no existing
              research has concurrently implemented all three methodologies for HWSNs. Additionally, clustering
              algorithms frequently prioritize CH selection without adequately balancing normal node distribution
              among CHs, leading to uneven energy consumption. Tree construction methods, while improving
              connectivity, often neglect the strong interdependence between sleep scheduling and tree formation,
              resulting in suboptimal structures that fail to maximize network lifetime. Metaheuristic-based
              approaches, though effective, frequently rely on standard initialization schemes and generic
              operators, limiting their adaptability to problem-specific constraints. These shortcoming leaves a
              critical gap in the pursuit of holistic energy optimization. This gap underscores the novelty of our
              contribution: a unified framework that combines clustering, routing, and sleep scheduling with
              advanced optimization techniques, offering a robust and comprehensive solution to enhance energy
              efficiency in HWSNs.
                    Based on the aforementioned cases, this paper proposes a data collection method in HWSNs
              based on sleep scheduling, clustering, and routing. We address the challenges of determining sleep
              or wake states for super nodes, constructing a tree on the awake super nodes, and clustering the
              network by assigning awake super nodes as the CHs for normal nodes. To reduce the problem state
              space and simplify problem-solving, we divide the process into two phases. In the first phase, we
              simultaneously determine the awake super nodes and create a tree on these super nodes to deliver
              data to the BS. In the second phase, for each normal node, we select a super node as its CH from the
              awake super nodes that are adjacent to them. Both phases are modeled and solved using a Genetic
              Algorithm (GA) to obtain optimal solutions in a short time. By employing GA with customized
              initialization, problem-specific chromosome representation, and tailored genetic operators, our
              algorithm achieves superior energy efficiency and network performance. The novel cost functions
              introduced in both phases further enhance load balancing across super nodes, ensuring prolonged
              network sustainability.
                    The innovations of this paper can be summarized as follows:
                   The proposed solution for reducing the state space effectively addresses the challenges of sleep
                    scheduling, clustering, and tree construction on awake nodes by dividing the process into two
                    phases, each optimized using a GA.
                   Considering the strong interdependence between the sleep scheduling of super nodes and the
                    construction of a tree on these nodes - since the tree must be built on awake super nodes -, these
                    two problems are tackled simultaneously through an innovative modeling approach.
                   In the first phase, a novel cost function is employed to enhance environmental monitoring by
                    selecting a set of super nodes as awake ones while minimizing the energy consumption of super
                    nodes.
                   Network clustering is modeled and optimized using a GA in the second phase, with a new cost
                    function specifically designed to reduce energy consumption with distributing normal nodes
                    among the awake CHs.
                   Considering the pivotal role of initialization in the ultimate solution of GA, we propose a custom
                    initialization in the first phase which helps GA to converge more quickly. The proposed method
                    splits the HWSN into rings, and select equal number of awake super nodes per ring. This



            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025               doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                              3 of 22



                    scheme, which is inspired from unequal clustering, helps balancing energy exhaustion of super
                    nodes and prolongs network lifetime.
                   We modify and customize the GA operators (crossover and mutation) to fit our problem and
                    help achieving better solutions.
                   The proposed solution has been rigorously evaluated in simulation environments, consistently
                    demonstrating its superiority over existing methods.
                   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the related work, while
              Section 3 outlines the network model. Section 4 provides a comprehensive description of the
              proposed method, and Section 5 presents the results obtained using this method. Finally, Section 6
              concludes the paper.

              2. Related Works
                    We review related research in three key areas. First, we explore sleep scheduling studies on
              heterogenous and homogenous WSNs. The second part investigates clustering algorithms within the
              field. Finally, in the last part, we consider research on tree construction and routing protocols. The
              mentioned algorithms used different techniques for solving considered problems including greedy,
              metaheuristic, and learning methods.
                    The literature on sleep scheduling and resource allocation in WSNs explored various approaches
              to optimize energy efficiency. Alwasel et al. [13] considered HWSNs and proposed an energy-
              efficient sleep-and-awake scheme to manage sleep states based on node resources, prioritizing
              network lifetime. In their work, they proposed iterative local search strategy to construct disjoint
              dominating sets, activating nodes of one dominating set each time instance. The algorithm prioritized
              nodes with higher residual energy for being awake while transitioning others to sleep modes.
              However, their method introduced computational complexity due to exhaustive search processes,
              limiting scalability in large-scale HWSNs. Additionally, it did not consider clustering and routing
              problems.
                    Sleep scheduling in homogenous WSNs was explored in [14–16]. Niyato et al. [14] used factors
              like energy level of nodes, the number of packets in their buffers, and channel condition, to determine
              sleep scheduling policies for solar-powered networks. The algorithm aimed to awaken nodes with
              higher energies, less congested buffers, and better channel conditions. References [15–19] employed
              Reinforcement Learning (RL) to determine the awake and sleep schedule of the nodes. Studies in [15–
              17] developed RL-driven sleep scheduling for star topology networks. Among the mentioned
              algorithms, references [16,19] focused on wireless body area networks, and considered criteria such
              as energy level of nodes, emergency of gathered data by sensors, and transmission delay, to decide
              on awake/sleep statuses of sensors. The algorithm proposed in [18] determined CHs and performed
              clustering using a greedy approach, followed by applying RL for sleep scheduling.
                    Clustering is vital in WSNs for efficient data collection and transmission. Reference [20]
              introduced a RL-based clustering model for IoT and HWSNs, aimed at optimizing resource
              utilization and reducing energy consumption. In [21], a scheme was presented that categorized
              sensors into normal and super nodes based on initial energy levels. Clusters were formed with
              energy-efficient CH selection, which prioritize super nodes by assigning more weights to them.
              Bhasker et al. [22] introduced a cluster-based data gathering technique for farm irrigation systems,
              focusing on reducing sensor node energy use and balancing the workload on CHs. They proposed a
              protocol that selects and rotates CHs near the energy centroid within clusters and designates gateway
              nodes to assist CHs. In the proposed algorithm in [23], CH selection was guided by a fitness function
              derived from multi-objective optimization. The objectives included minimizing energy usage and the
              distance between CHs and their Cluster Members (CMs), and maximizing the coverage of the
              network. The algorithm applied deep residual network to optimize number of clusters and CH
              selection. Afterwards, the binary horse herd optimization algorithm was used for route selection and
              data transmission.




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                               4 of 22



                    Energy-efficient routing is vital for WSNs. Therefore, the problem of clustering and routing in
              homogenous WSNs has been studied in various research including [7,24–27]. Reference [26]
              proposed a fuzzy logic-based CH selection method, which used the Mamdani inference engine to
              evaluate factors such as residual energy, node centrality, and distance to the BS, mimicking human
              decision-making for optimal CH selection. Authors in [24] presented an optimization approach for
              CH selection in IoT-assisted WSNs. They used factors like energy, delay, and distance as fitness
              criteria. Additionally, they employed tunicate swarm Gray Wolf Optimization (GWO) algorithm for
              multipath routing. In [28], the authors introduced a hybrid Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and
              artificial bee colony algorithm to reduce routing costs. Vijayan et al. [29] proposed a machine
              learning-based routing system for IoT-connected sensor networks that considered energy usage and
              traffic patterns. Shahid et al. [30] improved packet delivery and energy efficiency by using proper
              links, where the criteria for link selection was the link quality, energy of nodes, and distance between
              nodes. The quality of links was estimated using exponential moving average.
                    Metaheuristic algorithms have also been applied to HWSN optimization, including clustering
              and routing [4,5,11,12,31–33]. In [4], PSO was used to assign super nodes as CHs and build a spanning
              tree. The criteria in PSO-based clustering were network lifetime and distances between CMs and CHs,
              while average energy of routes and distances between successive super nodes on routes were
              considered for tree construction. Reference [11] also employed PSO for clustering and routing,
              focusing on energy and reliability. Wang et al. [31] performed join clustering and tree construction
              using bipartite chromosomes. The algorithm aimed to balance energy consumption of CHs while
              reducing overall energy consumption. Additionally, an improved chaos logistic map was applied to
              generate initial population to increase population diversity. In [5], a two-phase GA handled
              clustering and tree construction for multi-channel HWSNs with normal and super nodes. The multi-
              radio super nodes were designated as CH, while the single-radio normal nodes were assigned to one
              of its neighboring CHs and connected to it using one of its assigned channels. In the tree construction
              phase, the algorithm balanced energy of super nodes based on their distances to the BS, which
              improved network lifetime considerably. Additionally, it offered a novel criterion for even
              distribution of normal nodes among CHs, further balancing the energy consumption of super nodes.
              The proposed algorithm in [32] was extended in [12], where authors employed GWO to optimize
              Transmission Power Control (TPC) in a HWSN with TPC-enabled super nodes. Reference [33]
              presented a novel algorithm for efficient data gathering in HWSNs. The approach consisted of two
              key phases: clustering, and spanning tree construction. GA was employed in both phases, utilizing a
              problem-specific chromosome representation, a tailored population initialization scheme, and
              customized genetic operators (i.e., mutation and crossover). Specifically, in the tree construction
              phase, chromosomes were structured as trees, facilitating designing an effective initialization scheme
              and GA operations.
                    Despite the advancements in sleep scheduling, clustering, and tree construction for HWSNs,
              existing methods often suffer from key limitations. Our proposed solution addresses these deficits
              through an integrated two-phase approach that simultaneously optimizes sleep scheduling,
              clustering, and tree construction. The proposed GAs for the phases includes customized initialization
              methods and operators, and novel cost functions, yielding further energy efficiency and network
              lifetime. Rigorous simulations confirm the robustness of our approach, demonstrating its superiority
              over existing methods in key performance metrics.

              3. Network Model

                    In the assumed network model, there are two types of nodes: super nodes and normal nodes
              (Figure 1). We use and        to show the set of super nodes and normal sensors, respectively. Super
              nodes possess greater initial energy and a larger transmission range compared to normal nodes. The
              initial energy and transmission range of super nodes are shown by       and     , respectively. These
              parameters are presented by        and      for normal sensors. Additionally, there are fewer super
              nodes compared to normal nodes in the network. Furthermore, we use         as the remaining energy



            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                   doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                                     5 of 22



              of a the     node, either super node or normal sensor. Finally, |. | shows the cardinality of an
              assumed set.




              Figure 1. A sample HWSN. Super nodes are represented by octagons, where gray octagons denote sleeping
              super nodes and green octagons indicate awake ones. Additionally, normal nodes are shown by circles.

                    Normal nodes are tasked with environmental monitoring. They collect data and send it to a
              nearby super node, which serves as their CH. The potential CHs for a normal node                are super
              nodes within its transmission range. Each super node aggregates data of its assigned CMs. Since the
              BS might not be directly reachable by all super nodes, data needs to be relayed. For a super node ,
              other super nodes closer to the BS and within its transmission range are considered as its potential
              parents. One of these super nodes is selected as the parent for forwarding the data.
                    The network employs Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) at the MAC layer which divides
              channel into timeslots. The data exchange process includes intra-cluster communication, where
              normal nodes transmit their collected data to their designated CHs during allocated timeslots, and
              inter-cluster communication, where super nodes use multi-hop forwarding to relay the gathered data
              toward the BS during their assigned timeslots.
                    All nodes of the network expend energy during communication. This energy consumption is
              influenced by the size of the data packets transmitted or received. Reference [34] presents (1) and (2)
              for calculating consumed energy needed for transmission (         ) and reception (    ) based on packet
              size ( ), respectively. These formulas incorporate factors like internal circuit energy (    ) and signal
              amplification energy. The amplification model varies with distance: the free space model for shorter
              distances, and the multipath fading model for distances beyond the threshold . Amplifier energy
              consumption is denoted by         and      for these models, respectively.
                                                                   +          ,        <
                                                 (,    )=                                                       (1)
                                                                   +           ,       ≥

                                                                 ()=                                            (2)


              4. The Proposed Method
                  Figure 2 illustrates the workflow cycle during network lifetime. As shown in this figure, the
              network lifetime is divided into multiple rounds, each consisting of several time slices. During each
              time slice, data collected by normal nodes is first transmitted to super nodes via intra-cluster
              communication. Subsequently, super nodes relay this data to the BS through inter-cluster



            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025               doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                              6 of 22



              communication. The proposed algorithm is executed at the start of each round, where the BS gathers
              network information, such as the remaining energy of the nodes, to configure the network for optimal
              performance. This configuration is then applied throughout the time slices of the round. At the end
              of each round, the BS re-runs the algorithm to adjust for any changes in node characteristics, ensuring
              continuous and efficient network operation.




              Figure 2. Workflow cycle during network lifetime.

                    Our algorithm enhances data collection in HWSNs through integrating sleep scheduling,
              clustering, and routing. Considering the wide solution space of the mentioned problems, we divide
              the process into two phases to reduce complexity. Additionally, we employ a GA to obtain efficient
              solutions for each phase within a reasonable time. In the first phase, GA is used to solve the problem
              of selecting awake nodes and constructing a communication tree. The second phase focuses on
              network clustering. The specific steps involved in each phase are detailed in Section 4.1 and Section
              4.2, respectively.

              4.1. Sleep Scheduling and Tree Construction

                   In WSNs, efficient energy management is crucial for prolonging the network lifetime,
              particularly in heterogeneous environments where nodes have varying capabilities. Sleep scheduling




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                  doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                                7 of 22



              plays a pivotal role in conserving energy by allowing nodes to enter a low-power sleep mode when
              not actively transmitting or receiving data. This approach extends the lifetime of nodes, ensuring that
              critical tasks such as data transmission and routing are handled thoroughly. Simultaneously, during
              tree construction, it should be ensured that the network avoids overloading certain nodes, preventing
              premature depletion of their energy resources. The process of tree construction is intrinsically linked
              to the sleep scheduling, because the awake nodes form the backbone for data gathering within the
              network. Therefore, the combined approach of optimal sleep scheduling and tree construction is
              essential for maintaining a balanced load distribution, enhancing the overall efficiency, and
              extending the longevity of the HWSN. Accordingly, we propose an innovative approach that
              combines sleep scheduling and tree construction into a single-step process. This unified model,
              optimized using a GA, is designed to efficiently find the best solution within a reasonable time. The
              following sections will detail the chromosome representation, initial population construction, cost
              function, and GA operators proposed in our approach.

              4.1.1. Chromosome Representation

                   The proposed GA aims to simultaneously address the dual issues of sleep scheduling and tree
              construction in HWSNs. To achieve this, we design a chromosome structure represented as a matrix
              with dimensions of 2 × | |. Each column within this matrix corresponds to a specific super node in
              the network. The first row of the matrix corresponds to sleep state of super nodes, while the second
              row is dedicated to the tree construction problem. The values in the first row are binary: zero indicates
              that a super node is in the sleep state, and one indicates that it is awake. Additionally, the second row
              presents the selected parents for super nodes. In a chromosome, the super nodes are arranged
              sequentially based on their distance to the BS. Thus, the super node closest to the BS occupies the first
              column, while the one farthest away is positioned in the last column. Figure 3 shows an example
              chromosome and its representative tree.




                                         (a)                                                (b)

              Figure 3. A sample chromosome and its representative awake nodes and tree; (a) The chromosome; (b) The
              resultant network configuration according to the chromosome.

              4.1.2. Population Initialization
                   The elements of the proposed chromosome structure are populated according to the following
              scheme. A critical consideration to construct a chromosome is to select proper awake nodes, ensuring
              they are evenly distributed across the network. This distribution is essential for having at-least one




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                            doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                                          8 of 22



              super node within proximity to each normal node, allowing it to serve as the CH for gathering and
              forwarding data to the BS.
                    We divide the network into concentric rings centered around the BS, and awaken              super
              nodes per ring (Figure 4). This unequal clustering idea was previously comprehensively discussed in
              [35] and proved to be a good solution to hot-spot problem. Determining the optimal number of rings
              is a complex process, refined through trial and error. Rings that are too narrow may limit the selection
              of suitable nodes, while excessively large rings could lead to suboptimal configurations. Furthermore,
              the value of     is determined based on different parameters such as the number of normal nodes
              and density of super nodes. The selection of awake nodes within each ring is carried out randomly,
              based on a weighted probability that considers remaining energy of super nodes. Equation (3)
              calculates         ( ), the probability of selecting    to serve as awake nodes. In this equation, ( )
              shows the ring which       belongs to.

                                                                  ( )=                                                        (3)
                                                                              ∑   ∈ ( )




              Figure 4. The illustrated network in Figure 3 with rings.

                   Since the tree construction relies on awake nodes, columns corresponding to super nodes that
              are in the sleep state do not process. However, for super nodes that are awake (with a value of one),
              a subsequent step is required to construct the tree. This step involves selecting a random neighbor
              for each awake super node , which must be both awake and positioned closer to the BS than , to
              form the tree structure. If none of the neighbors of    is awake, the chromosome is discarded. The
              selection of the parent among the super nodes which fulfill these constraints is influenced by their
              remaining energy, as shown in (4). According to this equation, super nodes with higher remaining
              energy have a greater probability of being selected as the parents, thereby ensuring that the tree
              construction process favors nodes with sufficient energy reserves. This approach not only helps in
              balancing the energy consumption across the network but also enhances the overall robustness and
              longevity of the HWSN.

                                                       =                                                                (4)
                                                           ∑   ∈ ( )⋀     (   ,   )       ( ,   )⋀

              where     ( ) is the set of neighbor super nodes of         , and             is the distance function.




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                        doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                                      9 of 22



              4.1.3. Cost Function

                   GA uses a cost function to evaluate the acceptability of a particular solution (or chromosome).
              This function assigns a numerical value to each solution that reflects its quality or fitness. Our
              objective is to investigate two key factors: 1) the quality of the selection of awake nodes, and 2) the
              quality of the constructed tree.
                   To evaluate the first factor, we examine the number of normal nodes that lack an awake super
              node in their neighborhood, as defined by (5). In this equation,        stands for the   chromosome.
              Additionally,       shows the set of orphan normal nodes that there is not an awake super node in
              their vicinity. The smaller value of           indicates choosing better awake nodes, as it designates
              that the selected awake nodes are distributed evenly in the network, ensuring each normal node has
              at-least one awake super node nearby. The division by the total number of awake nodes is intended
              to normalize this metric, making it comparable with other factors.
                                                                              |         |
                                                                          =                                         (5)
                                                                                  | |
                    Another factor for evaluating the chromosomes in this context is the quality of the constructed
              tree. To assess this, we aim to increase the minimum remaining energy of the nodes, as described in
              (6). In this equation,     demonstrates the remaining energy of super node    at the end of the round
              assuming the proposed network configuration by          . This approach ensures that tree structures
              which route data through nodes with higher energy levels are considered more suitable.
                                                                          min      ∈
                                                                      =                                             (6)

                    Finally, our cost function is defined by (7), and our objective is to minimize it.
                                            =     ×               −       ×                     ,   +     =1        (7)


              4.1.4. GA Operators
                   The key components of GA, including selection, crossover, and mutation operators, are
              introduced in this section. We customize each of these operators to suit the specific problem at hand
              and to align with the proposed chromosome structure model, which we will detail in the following.
                   Selection: The selection operator in GA is responsible for choosing which individuals from the
              current population will contribute to the creation of the next generation. The idea is to select the fittest
              individuals, those that are better suited to the problem according to a predefined fitness function, to
              pass on their genes (chromosome information) to their offspring. We employ Roulette Wheel
              Selection (RWS) as our selection operator, detailed in (8). In this equation, the term            refers to
              the population of chromosomes. In the RWS method, the chance of each chromosome to being
              selected as a parent is proportional to its cost. The lower the cost function value, the higher the
              probability of selection, and conversely, chromosomes with higher cost values have a reduced chance
              of selection. This approach increases the likelihood that superior chromosomes, which demonstrate
              more effective network structures, will produce the next generation. However, we do not completely
              eliminate the possibility of selecting weaker chromosomes. They are still given a chance to contribute
              as parents, with the hope that some aspects of their structure might offer a valuable solution to the
              problem.
                                                                      1/           (        )
                                                              =                                                     (8)
                                                                  ∑   ∈       1/            (   )

              Crossover: The crossover operator in GA is responsible for combining the genetic information of two
              parent chromosomes to produce offspring. This process mimics biological reproduction and aims to
              create new solutions (chromosomes) that inherit features from both parents, potentially leading to
              better solutions. In this phase, we employ the single-point crossover operator. Accordingly, a point



            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                   doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                                10 of 22



              is selected on two chromosomes, and the genes on the left side of one chromosome are combined
              with the genes on the right side of the other chromosome, and vice versa, resulting in two new
              offspring.
                    It is crucial to note that this crossover operation may not always yield valid chromosomes. The
              first issue is that a node may have no awake parent toward the BS. The other concern is that the
              number of awake nodes may deviate from the desired quantity. To address these issues, a repair
              procedure is proposed. The method ensures that the number of awake nodes in each ring is equal to
                 . Accordingly, the number of awake nodes in each ring is examined: if it matches        , no action is
              required. If there are more awake nodes than desired, we probabilistically reduce their number by
              switching some of them to the sleep state, based on their remaining energy levels (Equation (9)).
              Conversely, if there are fewer awake nodes than necessary, additional nodes from the sleep state are
              selected, again probabilistically based on their remaining energy according to (10), and switched to
              the awake state. Once the number of awake nodes has been adjusted, we proceed to validate the
              offspring. For nodes whose have at-least one potential parent in the resultant offspring, no change is
              required. Otherwise, one of the closer super nodes to the BS is activated probabilistically considering
              their remaining energy, as shown in (11).

                                                              ( )=                                             (9)
                                                                     ∑    ∈ ( )∧


                                                          ( )=                                                (10)
                                                                     ∑   ∈ ( )∧


                                                      =                                                       (11)
                                                          ∑    ∈ ( )⋀     (   ,   )     ( ,   )⋀

                   Figure 5 demonstrates an example of the proposed crossover operator. In this figure,         is
              selected as crossover point. Accordingly, the left-hand side genes of first chromosome (Figure 5(a))
              and the right-hand side genes of the other chromosome (Figure 5(b)) are combined and result two
              offspring. Here, we demonstrate one of their offspring in Figure 5(c). After production of the
              offspring, we check for the validity of chromosome and change the structure of the chromosome to
              produce a valid chromosome (Figure 5(d)).
                   Mutation: The mutation operator in GA introduces random changes to the genes of a
              chromosome to maintain genetic diversity within the population. This operator is crucial because,
              without it, GA might converge too quickly to a suboptimal solution, getting stuck in local optima.
              According to the chromosome structure, we propose a customized mutation operator. In this
              approach, the number of genes of adopted chromosomes undergoing mutation is higher in the initial
              iterations of the algorithm and gradually decreases as the algorithm progresses. The number of genes
              undergoing mutation at iteration , ( ), is calculated as:

                                                              ( )=      max   1−                              (12)
                                                                                      max

              where max and max are the initial number of genes undergoing mutation and the total number of
              iterations, respectively. This strategy enables extensive exploration of the solution space in the early
              iterations and shifts towards exploitation in the later ones.
                   The corresponding super nodes to the adopted genes are investigated, and the awake ones are
              switched from the awake to the sleep state. For each of these asleep super nodes, a node in the same
              ring must be wakened up. This activation is controlled by the given probabilistic function in (10).
                   Figure 6 demonstrates of an example of the mutation operator. In this figure, based on the
              mutation operator,       goes to the sleep mode. Accordingly, one other super node, for example ,
              is wakened up in the ring and a parent is selected for this node from the awake super nodes.




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                            doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                                         11 of 22




                                          (a)
                                                                                                      (b)




                                          (c)                                                         (d)

              Figure 5. Crossover operation for sleep scheduling and tree construction; (a) The first parent; (b) The second
              parent; (c) The first offspring before repairement; (d) The ultimate first offspring.




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                  doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                                 12 of 22




                                        (a)                                                 (b)

              Figure 6. Mutation operation for sleep scheduling and tree consrtruction; (a) The adopted chromosome before
              mutation; (b) The mutated chromosome.

              4.2. Clustering

                   After completing the first phase, which involves introducing awake nodes in the network and
              constructing a tree on them, we proceed to the second phase, in which each normal node selects an
              awake super node in their neighborhood to act as their CH. To achieve this aim, we employ a GA,
              the details of which are outlined in the following.

              4.2.1. Chromosome Representation and Population Initialization

                   The proposed chromosome structure for network clustering consists of an array of length | |.
              Each gene of this chromosome corresponds to a normal node of the HWSN. To ensure a consistent
              structure across all chromosomes, the normal nodes in each chromosome are sorted based on their
              distance to the BS. Each gene presents the randomly selected CH for each corresponded normal node,
              which is selected from the awake super nodes within its transmission range. Figure 7 illustrates an
              example clustering chromosome and its corresponding network structure.




                                                                  (a)




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                  doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                               13 of 22




                                                                  (b)

              Figure 7. A sample chromosome and its resultant clustering scheme; (a) The chromosome; (b) The resultant
              clusters.

              4.2.2. Cost Function

                   A cost function is proposed to assess the quality of clustering chromosomes. In this context, we
              consider two key criteria: The first metric promotes even clustering by ensuring an equal number of
              CMs for each CH, and the second one aims to maximize the minimum energy of CHs. The former
              helps to evenly distribute the load of the network, while the latter accounts for the energy levels of
              the CHs to prevent any super node from depleting prematurely. Equation (13) describes the first
              measure, where        represents the set of awake super nodes selected in the previous phase, and
                   indicates the number of cluster members assigned to the super node       according to clustering
              chromosome        . Additionally,        represents the ideal number of cluster members and is
              calculated by dividing the number of available normal nodes by the number of awake super nodes.

                                                                        =                                    (13)
                                                                              ∈

                   Equation (14) describes          , which is similar to         in the tree construction phase. The
              difference is that         relies solely on the structure of the proposed tree, without knowledge of
              the number of CMs for each super node. On the other hand,                accounts for the exact number
              of CMs per super node in the clustering phase, enabling more precise calculation of        .
                                                                            min   ∈
                                                                    =                                        (14)

                    Finally, the energy level of normal nodes is balanced as described in (15).
                                                                        min       ∈
                                                                    =                                        (15)

                    Our cost function is defined by (16), and our objective is to minimize this function.
                                               =     ×                  −         ×
                                                                                                             (16)
                                                     +     ×                  ,       +    +      =1


              4.2.3. GA Operators




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                  doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                                 14 of 22



                   Our GA uses three core operators to iteratively refine the population and guide it towards high-
              quality solutions including selection, crossover, and mutation. These operators are explored in the
              following.
                   Selection: We use RWS as the selection operator, which selects chromosomes based on the value
              returned by the cost function using a similar probability function to (8). Chromosomes with lower
              costs (indicating better solutions) have a higher probability of being chosen to produce the next
              generation.
                   Crossover: The crossover operator is employed to explore the solution space. In this case, a
              single-point crossover is used. All offspring produced by this operator are valid solutions for the
              clustering problem.
                   Mutation: In the proposed mutation process, for a random chromosome, a number of genes –
              which are corresponded to CHs of normal nodes – are randomly selected. The CH of each chosen
              normal node is changed from its current CH to another awake super node within its transmission
              range.

              5. Experimental Results and Discussions
                    In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed method and compare it with
              HEDHMG [5], EFCRPSO [11], EFEBPSO [4], and CRCGA [31]. The performance metrics used for
              comparison include area coverage, total energy consumption, First Node Die (FND), Last Node Die
              (LND), and number of available super nodes. The algorithms are implemented using WSNSimPy, a
              Python library for discrete event simulation of WSNs. The simulations are performed on networks
              with dimensions of 200m×200m. Through experimentation, we identify that dividing the networks
              into four rings provide the best outcomes. Additionally, the experimentation shows that to ensure
              adequate coverage on normal nodes, keeping half of the super nodes awake provides an optimal
              balance. We evaluate two different networks,               and        , which differ in node density. The
              network           consists of 60 super nodes and 200 normal nodes, with the BS positioned in the lower-
              left corner of the area. The network          is denser, featuring 80 super nodes and 250 normal nodes,
              and also has the BS located in the corner, similar to           . Table 1 outlines the parameters used in
              the simulations. Additionally, Table 2 provides the GA parameters for the proposed method,
              including the weights for the criteria used in the cost functions, the number of iterations, and the
              population size.

              Table 1. Simulation parameters.

                                       Parameter                                                Value
                                   Network dimension                                        200m × 200m
                                                                                                  2J
                                                                                                  10J
                                                                                                 30m
                                                                                                 90m
                                                                                               50nJ/bit
                                                                                             10pJ/bit/
                                                                                           0.0013pJ/bit/
                                                                                                 ⁄
                                Time slices per round                                            50
                                  Number of rings                                                4
                             Number of awake super nodes                            50% of all the super nodes




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                              15 of 22



              Table 2. GA parameters.

                                      Parameter                                             Value
                                    Population size                                          30
                                  Number of iterations                                       50
                                                                                             0.5
                                                                                             0.5
                                                                                             0.3
                                                                                             0.4
                                                                                             0.3

              5.1. Normal Node Coverage
                    This metric quantifies the number of normal nodes that have a super node as their CH. It serves
              as an indicator of how effectively the first phase of the algorithm selects awake super nodes. In this
              way, the algorithm can ensure super nodes are evenly spread across the network which increases the
              likelihood that normal nodes have an accessible awake super node nearby. Effective network
              coverage is critical for achieving performance and efficiency goals.
                    Figure 8 illustrates area coverage for        and         using the proposed method. In the early
              rounds,           achieves almost full coverage, primarily because it contains a greater number of super
              nodes compared to            . This higher super node density facilitates finding an awake super node in
              the neighborhood of normal nodes, supporting a strong coverage. Conversely,                  , which has
              fewer super nodes, displays slightly lower coverage, as the reduced number of super nodes limits the
              availability of CHs across the network. As time progresses, coverage decreases in both networks due
              to the depletion of super nodes. The decrease in the network coverage over time can be attributed to
              the energy consumption and eventual failure of super nodes, which reduces the ability of the HWSN
              to maintain consistent communication routes. However, even with this gradual reduction, the area
              coverage remains within acceptable thresholds in            and          .




              Figure 8. Normal node coverage of the proposed algorithm using        and     .

                   Figure 9 illustrates a comparison of normal node coverage between the proposed algorithm and
              other considered approaches. As depicted in the figure, the proposed algorithm significantly
              outperforms HEDHMG, EFCRPSO, EFEBPSO, and CRCGA in both                    and       . Specifically,
              in       , the proposed algorithm achieves an average coverage improvement of 8.6%, 29%, 31.1%,
              and 51.1% over HEDHMG, EFCRPSO, EFEBPSO, and CRCGA, respectively. Similarly, in                , the
              proposed algorithm surpasses these algorithms by 5.6%, 14.5%, 27.4%, and 33.4%, respectively.




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                  doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                               16 of 22




                                         (a)                                               (b)

              Figure 9. Normal node coverage comparison (a)        ; (b)           .

                   This sustained coverage is largely due to the inclusion of              in the algorithm, which
              optimizes the sleep scheduling of super nodes. Using           ensures that super nodes are cyclically
              activated, balancing their load to delay energy depletion. By minimizing the extent of orphan nodes
              through effective sleep scheduling, this factor contributes to prolonged network coverage and
              functionality. Consequently, despite the inevitable death of super nodes, the proposed method
              ensures that the network retains satisfactory coverage levels over time, supporting continued data
              collection and communication within the HWSN. The other factor enhancing our algorithm is
              proposing customized initialization, and crossover and mutation operators. According to these
              schemes, the HWSNs are divided into ring of equal width, and it is tried to keep the number of awake
              super nodes in different rings the same. Therefore, the awake nodes distribute evenly throughout the
              network.

              5.2. Total Consumed Energy
                   The next metric under consideration is the total consumed energy, which calculates the
              cumulative energy usage of super nodes that handle the primary task of data transmission and
              delivery within the network. This metric is essential for evaluating the efficiency of the network, as
              nodes have limited, non-rechargeable energy sources, and conserving this energy directly influences
              network longevity. Figure 10 compares total energy consumption of the proposed method with its
              competitive algorithms in        and         . In both networks, the proposed method outperforms
              competing algorithms in terms of energy exhaustion. Specifically, for             , it reduces energy
              consumption by 10.5%, 14%, 16.4%, and 18.7% when compared to the HEDHMG, EFCRPSO,
              EFEBPSO, and CRCGA algorithms, respectively. These values are equal to 10.7%, 16.9%, 20.7%, and
              21%, for       .




                                         (a)                                                (b)

              Figure 10. Total energy consumption comparison (a)           ; (b)       .

                  The enhanced energy efficiency of our proposed approach in both network types highlights the
              robustness of the proposed method under varying conditions. This superiority is achieved due to the



            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                 doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                               17 of 22



              integration of four critical factors that we apply within the tree construction and clustering phases.
              The first factor,          , ensures that awake super nodes are distributed uniformly across the
              network, which is particularly important for the tree construction phase. By spreading awake super
              nodes evenly,             enables the formation of balanced communication routes. Without such
              uniform distribution, awake super nodes could become concentrated in some areas, leaving other
              sections without adequate awake super node coverage. This imbalance would limit the routing
              options in those uncovered areas, leading to increased energy consumption as nodes are forced to
              transmit data to distant parents. Furthermore,              prioritizes routes with higher remaining
              energy in the tree construction phase, helping to balance energy consumption across the WSN.
              Finally, proposing customized initialization method and GA operators enhances the performance of
              the proposed algorithm and reduces energy consumption.
                   In the clustering phase, additional efficiency is achieved through               and           . The
              third factor plays a critical role by distributing normal nodes among super nodes as evenly as
              possible. This distribution balances the load across all super nodes, reducing the likelihood of any
              single node being overwhelmed by a large number of connections. Such even distribution not only
              conserves the energy of individual super nodes but also enhances the overall energy efficiency of the
              network. By preventing excessive energy consumption in specific nodes,                  contributes to a
              more sustainable energy usage scheme throughout the network. Additionally,                    focuses on
              energy conservation of super nodes. This metric prevents premature exhaustion of any single super
              node by distributing node responsibilities based on energy levels, similar to the prioritization strategy
              in the tree construction phase. Finally,           reduces energy consumption of normal nodes and
              prevent choosing far super nodes as CHs, which required high energy levels for data transmission.
                   The employed factors in the cost functions create an energy management strategy that optimizes
              the selection of awake super nodes. This approach not only conserves energy in individual nodes but
              also maximizes overall network efficiency and ensures that HWSNs maintain robust coverage and
              functionality over lengthy periods. Using customized initialization, crossover, and mutation in the
              tree construction phase also improves energy efficiency. Even distribution of awake super nodes
              avoids long distances between normal nodes and their CHs, reducing exhausted energy for intra-
              cluster communication.

              5.3. Network Lifetime
                   In this section we discuss two important factors: FND and LND, as shown in Figure 11. As the
              figure illustrates, in our algorithm, both FND and LND occur significantly later compared to
              competitive algorithms. Specifically, using the proposed method in            results in improvement
              of 56, 167, 293, and 402 rounds or FND compared to HEDHMG, EFCRPSO, EFEBPSO, and CRCGA,
              respectively. For LND in          , the improvements are 140, 620, 615, and 810 rounds regarding the
              same algorithms. In         , the proposed method yields FND improvements of 161, 311, 487, and 532
              rounds, and LND improvements of 128, 508, 681, and 757 rounds compared to HEDHMG, EFCRPSO,
              EFEBPSO, and CRCGA, respectively.




                                        (a)                                                (b)

              Figure 11. Network lifetime comparison; (a) FDN; (b) LDN.




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                 doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                               18 of 22



                   The enhancements in these results can be attributed to effective sleep scheduling and robust tree
              construction in the first phase, and efficient clustering in the latter phase. To be more precise,
              plays a crucial role in ensuring a uniform distribution of awake super nodes across the network,
              which yields load-balanced trees and reduces the likelihood of energy depletion in concentrated
              areas. The second factor,           , operating in the tree construction phase, focuses on maximizing
              the minimum remaining energy of super nodes within the tree. This factor gives priority to choosing
              super nodes with higher energy reserves, helping to avoid overusing specific nodes and thus
              balancing energy consumption across the network. By distributing energy usage among super nodes
              more evenly,              helps extend the lifetime of each node and mitigates the risk of network
              segmentation due to energy depletion in specific regions. Additionally, the proposed initialization
              method and GA operators balance the number of awake super nodes in the rings, yielding more even
              energy exhaustion and longer network lifetime.
                   In the clustering phase,            and            aid in evenly distributing normal nodes among
              awake super nodes, further contributing to energy efficiency by preventing any single super node
              from becoming overloaded. Together, these factors significantly extend the operational lifetime of
              nodes within the network, leading to delayed FND and LND. Furthermore,                    balances energy
              consumption of normal nodes and prevents their early death.

              5.4. Number of Available Super Nodes
                   We define available super nodes as those that are alive and have other super nodes in their
              neighborhood capable of sending data toward the BS. Accordingly, a super node with a good amount
              of energy is considered unavailable if the BS is out of its transmission range and there is no other
              nearby super node to catch its data and forward it. The number of available super nodes is an
              important factor. This is due to a higher number of available super nodes improves area coverage,
              enabling the network to fulfill its primary goal of data delivery to the BS more efficiently. Figure 12
              reports the number of available super nodes in each round. As shown in this figure, the proposed
              method consistently demonstrates a higher number of available super nodes compared to
              competitive algorithms in all rounds for both            and        . In      , the proposed method
              shows improvements of 5 super nodes over HEDHMG, 16 super nodes over EFCRPSO, 21 super
              nodes over EFEBPSO, and 35 super nodes over CRCGA, after 1800 time slices. In                     , the
              improvements are 5 super nodes over HEDHMG, 15 super nodes over EFCRPSO, 26 super nodes
              over EFEBPSO, and 28 super nodes over CRCGA, after 1800 time slices.




                                       (a)                                                 (b)

              Figure 12. Number of available super nodes comparison (a)      ; (b)     .

                   The main factor to achieve higher number of alive super nodes of our algorithm regarding the
              competitive schemes is the even distribution of awake nodes. The proposed initialization scheme,
              customized operators, and           in the first phase, ensures an even distribution of awake super
              nodes throughout the network. This evenness reduces the chances of energy depletion in localized
              areas and promotes better coverage, which increases the likelihood of data being successfully



            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                     doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                                   19 of 22



              forwarded to the BS. The other factors used in          and       also play a significant role in achieved
              results. The            prioritizes super nodes for more energy for tree construction, increasing the
              chances of sustaining more alive super nodes, contributing to their availability. The third factor,
                      , used in the clustering, focuses on evenly distributing normal nodes among super nodes. This
              balance prevents individual super nodes from becoming overloaded, allowing them to remain
              operational and available for data forwarding. The application of customized initialization and GA
              operators in the first phase for balancing the distribution of super nodes throughout the HWSN
              increases the number of available super nodes.

              6. Conclusion and Future Works
                    This paper proposed an algorithm for efficient sleep scheduling and data gathering in HWSNs.
              The algorithm consisted of two main phases, each utilizing a GA to optimize network performance.
              In the first phase, sleep scheduling and tree construction were handled simultaneously, considering
              their high dependency. Clustering of normal nodes using the awake super nodes as CHs was
              performed in the second phase. The objectives of these phases focused on energy efficiency and
              preserving network coverage. The first objective maximized normal node coverage by selecting
              proper awake super nodes, ensuring each normal node had an awake super node within its
              neighborhood. The second objective prioritized energy efficiency by balancing remaining energy of
              super nodes, encouraging routes that have nodes with higher energy levels, prolonging network
              lifetime. This energy-centric prioritization was also applied in the clustering phase, where normal
              nodes were evenly distributed among the awake super nodes to prevent overloading and balance
              energy use. The other advantage of our algorithm was proposing customized initialization scheme,
              and crossover and mutation operators in its first phase. These schemes aimed at even distribution of
              awake super nodes. For this purpose, the HWSN was divided into rings, and the initialization
              method and GA operators tried to adopt equal number of awake super nodes in these rings.
                    For the future work, we aim to explore other energy saving techniques, such as dynamic
              modulation scaling. Furthermore, the proposed sleep scheduling scheme can be integrated into the
              multi-channel multi-radio HWSNs to improve both energy-efficiency and network capacity. Finally,
              we will examine other metaheuristic algorithms to attain better network configurations. Swarm
              intelligence algorithms, such as GWO, have been shown to generate high-quality solutions.
              Therefore, combining these methods with GA can improve the performance.

              Author Contributions: Conceptualization, Sarah Abdulelah Abbas and Leili Farzinvash; Methodology, Sarah
              Abdulelah Abbas, Leili Farzinvash, and Mina Zolfi.; Supervision, Leili Farzinvash and Mina Zolfi; Validation,
              Leili Farzinvash and Mina Zolfi; Software, Sarah Abdulelah Abbas; Writing - Original Draft preparation, Sarah
              Abdulelah Abbas and Leili Farzinvash; Writing - Review and Editing, Sarah Abdulelah Abbas, Leili Farzinvash,
              and Mina Zolfi.

              Funding: This research received no external funding.

              Data Availability Statement: Research described in the article did not use any data.

              Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


              Abbreviations
              The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:

                    HWSNs       Heterogeneous Wireless Sensor Networks
                    GA          Genetic Algorithm
                    BS          Base Station
                    CH          Cluster Head
                    GWO         Gray Wolf Optimization
                    RL          Reinforcement Learning




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                              doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                                               20 of 22



                    CM           Cluster Member
                    PSO          Particle Swarm Optimization
                    TPC          Transmission Power Control
                    TDMA         Time Division Multiple Access
                    RWS          Roulette Wheel Selection
                    FND          First Node Die
                    LND          Last Node Die


              References
              1.    Sharma, D.; Ojha, A.; Bhondekar, A.P. Heterogeneity consideration in wireless sensor networks routing
                    algorithms: A review. J. Supercomput. 2019, 75, 2341–2394. h ps://doi.org/10.1007/s11227-018-2635-8.
              2.    Tanwar, S.; Kumar, N.; Rodrigues, J.J. A systematic review on heterogeneous routing protocols for wireless
                    sensor network. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2015, 53, 39–56. h ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2015.03.004.
              3.    Katiyar, V.; Chand, N.; Soni, S. Clustering algorithms for heterogeneous wireless sensor network: A survey.
                    Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res. research 2010, 1. h ps://doi.org/10.26483/ijarcs.v2i1.320.
              4.    Azharuddin, M.; Jana, P.K. PSO-based approach for energy-eﬃcient and energy-balanced routing and
                    clustering in wireless sensor networks. Soft Comput. 2017, 21, 6825–6839. h ps://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-016-
                    2234-7.
              5.    Shahryari, M.-S.; Farzinvash, L.; Feizi-Derakhshi, M.R.; Taherkordi, A. High-throughput and energy-
                    eﬃcient data gathering in heterogeneous multi-channel wireless sensor networks using genetic algorithm.
                    Ad Hoc Netw. 2023, 139, 103041. h ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2022.103041.
              6.    Karthihadevi, M.; Pavalarajan, S. Sleep scheduling strategies in wireless sensor network. Advances in
                    Natural            and            Applied            Sciences,             2017,           11,             635–642.
                    h ps://www.aensiweb.net/AENSIWEB/anas/anas/2017/May/635-641.pdf.
              7.    Saadati, M.; Mazinani, S.M.; Khazaei, A.A.; Chabok, S.J.S.M. Energy eﬃcient clustering for dense wireless
                    sensor network by applying graph neural networks with coverage metrics. Ad Hoc Netw. 2024, 156, 103432.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2024.103432.
              8.    Pal, R.; Saraswat, M.; Kumar, S.; Nayyar, A.; Rajput, P.K. Energy eﬃcient multi-criterion binary grey wolf
                    optimizer based clustering for heterogeneous wireless sensor networks. Soft Comput. 2024, 28, 3251–3265.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1007/s00500-023-09316-0.
              9.    Bhanu, D.; Santhosh, R. Heterogeneous wireless sensor network design with optimal energy conservation
                    and security through eﬃcient routing algorithm. Journal of Cybersecurity & Information Management 2024,
                    13, 140-154. h ps://doi.org/10.54216/JCIM.130211.
              10.   Thangavelu, A.; Rajendran, P. Energy-eﬃcient secure routing for a sustainable heterogeneous IoT network
                    management. Sustainability 2024, 16, 4756. h ps://doi.org/10.3390/su16114756.
              11.   Kuila, P.; Jana, P.K. Energy eﬃcient clustering and routing algorithms for wireless sensor networks: Particle
                    swarm       optimization      approach.       Eng.     Appl.     Artif.       Intell.   2014,      33,     127–140.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2014.04.009.
              12.   Shahryari, M.-S.; Farzinvash, L.; Feizi-Derakhshi, M.R. Cost-eﬃcient network design in multichannel
                    WSNs with power control: A grey wolf optimization approach to routing and clustering. Int. J. Distrib. Sens.
                    Netw. 2024. h ps://doi.org/10.1155/2024/1357195.
              13.   Alwasel, B.; Salim, A.; Khedr, A.M.; Osamy, W. Dominating sets-based approach for maximizing lifetime
                    of IoT-based heterogeneous WSNs enabled sustainable smart city applications. IEEE Access 2024 12, 44069–
                    44079. h ps://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3379425.
              14.   Niyato, D.; Hossain, E.; Fallahi, A. Sleep and wakeup strategies in solar-powered wireless sensor/mesh
                    networks: Performance analysis and optimization. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. 2007, 6, 221–236.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1109/TMC.2007.30.
              15.   Wang, X.; Chen, H.; Li, S. A reinforcement learning-based sleep scheduling algorithm for compressive data
                    gathering    in   wireless    sensor    networks.    EURASIP       J.     Wirel.   Commun.       Netw.   2023,   28.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1186/s13638-023-02237-4.




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                                          doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                                                               21 of 22



              16.   Mohammadi, R.; Shirmohammadi, Z. RLS2: An energy eﬃcient reinforcement learning-based sleep
                    scheduling            for      energy       harvesting     WBANs.         Comput.       Netw.        2023,        229,      109781.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2023.109781.
              17.   Sangaiah, A.K.; Javadpour, A.; Ja’fari, F.; Zavieh, H.; Khaniabadi, S. M. SALA-IoT: Self-reduced internet of
                    things with learning automaton sleep scheduling algorithm. IEEE Sens. J. 2023, 23, 20737–20744.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2023.3242759.
              18.   El-Shenhabi, A.N.; Abdelhay, E.H.; Mohamed, M.A.; Moawad, I.F. A reinforcement learning-based
                    dynamic clustering of sleep scheduling algorithm (RLDCSSA-CDG) for compressive data gathering in
                    wireless sensor networks. Technologies 2025, 13, 25. h ps://doi.org/10.3390/technologies13010025.
              19.   Wang, L.; Zhang, G.; Li, J.; Lin, G. Joint optimization of power control and time slot allocation for wireless
                    body     area     networks         via   deep    reinforcement       learning.    Wirel.     Netw.   2020,     26,       4507–4516.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1007/s11276-020-02353-9.
              20.   Mughal, F.R.; He, J.; Zhu, N.; Almutiq, M.; Dharejo, F.A.; Jain, D.K.; Hussain, S.; Zardari, Z.A. An intelligent
                    hybrid-Q learning clustering approach and resource management within heterogeneous cluster networks
                    based on reinforcement learning. Trans. Emerg. Telecommun. 2024, 35, e4852. h ps://doi.org/10.1002/e .4852.
              21.   Rawat, P.; Rawat, G.S.; Rawat, H.; Chauhan, S. Energy-eﬃcient cluster-based routing protocol for
                    heterogeneous wireless sensor network. Ann. Telecommun. 2025, 80, 109–122. pp. 1–14, 2024.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1007/s12243-024-01015-7.
              22.   Bhasker, B.; Murali, S. An energy-eﬃcient cluster-based data aggregation for agriculture irrigation
                    management system using wireless sensor networks. Sustainable Energy Technologies and Assessments 2024,
                    65, 103771. h ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.seta.2024.103771.
              23.   Sudha, M.; Chandrakala, D.; Sreethar, S.; Shrivindhya, A. Energy eﬃcient spiking deep residual network
                    and binary horse herd optimization espoused clustering protocol for wireless sensor networks. Appl. Soft
                    Comput. 2024, 157, 111456. h ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2024.111456.
              24.   Chouhan, N.; Kumar, A.; Kumar, N. Taylor political optimizer-based cluster head selection in IOT-assisted
                    WSN networks. Int. J. Commun. Syst. 2024, 37, e5733. h ps://doi.org/10.1002/dac.5733.
              25.   Asiedu, D.K.P.; Lee, K.-J.; Yun, J.-H. Energy-eﬃcient routing, power control and energy clustering for
                    energy harvesting-enabled spectrum sharing IoT sensor networks. Internet of Things 2024, 25, 101122.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2024.101122.
              26.   Batra, P.K.; Vamsi, P.R. Fuzzy logic-based cluster head selection method for enhancing wireless sensor
                    network         lifetime.       International    Journal     of     Performability     Engineering        2024,      20,       81-90.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.23940/ijpe.24.02.p3.8190.
              27.   Kaviarasan, S.; Srinivasan, R. Developing a novel energy eﬃcient routing protocol in WSN using adaptive
                    remora          optimization             algorithm.        Expert       Syst.        Appl.      2024,         244,          122873.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.122873.
              28.   Vincent, S.S.M.; Duraipandian, N. Detection and prevention of sinkhole a acks in MANETS based routing
                    protocol using hybrid adaboost-random forest algorithm. Expert Syst. Appl. 2024, 249, 123765.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2024.123765
              29.   Vijayan, K.; Kshirsagar, P.R.; Sonekar, S.V.; chakrabarti, P.; Unhelkar, B.; Margala, M. Optimizing IoT-
                    enabled WSN routing strategies using whale optimization-driven multi-criterion correlation approach
                    employs         the         reinforcement     learning     agent.     Opt.      Quantum       Electron.      2024,       56,    568.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1007/s11082-023-06269-4.
              30.   Shahid, M.; Tariq, M.; Iqbal, Z.; Albarakati, H.M.; Fatima, N.; Khan, M.A. Link-quality based energy-
                    eﬃcient routing protocol for WSN in IoT. IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. 2024, 70, 4645–4653.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1109/TCE.2024.3356195.
              31.   Wang, C.; Liu, X.; Hu, H.; Han, Y.; Yao, M. Energy-eﬃcient and load-balanced clustering routing protocol
                    for wireless sensor networks using a chaotic genetic algorithm. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 158082–158096, 2020.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3020158.
              32.   Kumar, G.; Shannigrahi, S. On the NP-hardness of speed scaling with sleep state. Theor. Comput. Sci. 2015,
                    600, 1–10. h ps://doi.org/10.1016/j.tcs.2015.06.012.




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
Preprints.org (www.preprints.org) | NOT PEER-REVIEWED | Posted: 5 September 2025                      doi:10.20944/preprints202509.0430.v1


                                                                                                                     22 of 22



              33.   Alasadi, H.S.; Farzinvash, L.; Feizi-Derakhshi, M.R.; Mortazavi, S.A. Enhancing data collection in
                    heterogenous wireless sensor networks: A novel tree-structured genetic algorithm approach. IEEE Access
                    2024, 12, 173020–173036. h ps://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3502458.
              34.   Heinzelman, W.B.; Chandrakasan, A.P.; Balakrishnan, H. An application-speciﬁc protocol architecture for
                    wireless   microsensor      networks.     IEEE    Trans.     Wirel.   Commun.     2002,   1,    660–670.
                    h ps://doi.org/10.1109/TWC.2002.804190.
              35.   Gunjan. A review on unequal clustering protocols in wireless sensor networks. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 2024,
                    139, 1693–1707. h ps://doi.org/10.1007/s11277-024-11688-x.

              Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those
              of the individual author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s)
              disclaim responsibility for any injury to people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or
              products referred to in the content.




            © 2025 by the author(s). Distributed under a Creative Commons CC BY license.
