JOURNAL OF SUSTAINABLE ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY                                      Vol. 1, no. 1, June, 2024, pp. 75 – 81


           Energy-Efficient Clustering in Wireless Sensor Network: A
             Comparison between Genetic Algorithm and Bacteria
                                  Conjugation
                                           B. D Bala1, H. M Hassan2, S. M Lawan1
          1
           Department of Electrical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Aliko Dangote University of Science and
                                         Technology, Wudil, 713281, Kano, Nigeria
           2,
              Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, Sharda University, Greater Noida, India



      ARTICLE INFO                                      ABSTRACT
      Article History                                   Wireless Sensor Networks are resource restrained in terms of
      Received: 15 November 2022                        energy consumption, lifetime, and processing speed. The
      Accepted: 11 July 2023                            prevalent goals of many types of research in Wireless Sensor
      Published: 19 August 2024                         Networks are to lessen the energy consumption among the
                                                        sensor nodes and improve the life time of the network. Of all the
      Corresponding Author:                             measures, designing an efficient clustering protocol stands out.
      Name: B. D Bala                                   As a result, this research focuses on energy-efficient clustering
      Affiliation: Department of Electrical             in Wireless Sensor Networks. In this work, Genetic Algorithm is
      Engineering, Faculty of Engineering,              used to optimize clustering using the Mobile LEACH protocol. It
      Aliko Dangote University of Science               is observed that Genetic Algorithm has been used to optimize
      and Technology,                                   LEACH in the previous works, but little attention is made on
      Email: bdbala2@kustwudil.edu.ng                   Mobile LEACH. LEACH and Mobile LEACH with Genetic
                                                        Algorithm are implemented and simulated in MATLAB. The
                                                        results show that the introduction of mobility and optimization
                                                        using LEACH increases the stability period of the network. This
                                                        accounts for about a 25% decrease in the energy consumed by
                                                        the nodes of the network. It is therefore a rule of thumb in
                                                        optimization that using algorithm A, successfully in a particular
                                                        problem does not guarantee its effectiveness, it is          then
                                                        compared with other optimization techniques. As a result,
                                                        adaptive clustering of Mobile LEACH optimized with Bacteria
                                                        Conjugation Operator (BCO) is also implemented and the result
                                                        obtained outperforms the adaptive clustering obtained with
                                                        Genetic Algorithm.

                                                        Keywords:    Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) · Adaptive
                                                                     Clustering · LEACH-M (Less Energy Adaptive
                                                                     Channel Head-Mobile) · Genetic Algorithm (GA) ·
                                                                     Bacteria Conjugation Operator (BCO).



     1.       INTRODUCTION

              Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) is a collection of small and tiny low-powered sensors with sensing,
     data processing, transmitting, and receiving abilities. These minute sensors collect sensed data from the
     environment or the application for which they are deployed, transmit, and relay the information to the sink.
     The base station is equipped with sink nodes that collect and aggregate the information from the sensors and
     a decision is made therein. WSN is a synergistic coupling of the sensor, network technology, and wireless
     communication [1]. The nodes are densely and randomly deployed with a battery as their source of energy. It
     is therefore impractical to recharge the sensor nodes owing to the inaccessibility of the distribution areas [2].

     www.joset.com.ng
     ©Aliko University of Science and Technology 2024
Bala et al.                                                         J. Sustainable Eng. & Technol. 1(1): 75 – 81 (2024)

The energy consumption of each node has to be balanced to add to the longevity of the network [2]. So, energy
is consumed in various ways, but heavily during transmission once the connection has been established.
Consequently, designing a competent energy routing protocol is indeed necessary to increase the potential
lifetime of the network.
          Clustering is an important term in WSN that connotes the way the nodes present in the network
organize themselves into clusters based on certain parameters. It applies to big networks especially ad hoc
where the sensors are employed for sensing purposes. If the whole sensor nodes communicate with one
another to transmit the sensed information to their destination, network congestion and collision will set in
and eventually render the network less energy efficient due to limited resources. Clustering is one of the
solutions that meet the effective resource utilization and load balancing in WSN. In a clustered network, the
sensor nodes are arranged cluster-wise and one serves as the CH that oversees the activities of the cluster and
the remaining nodes send data to it. The CH is charged with the responsibility of aggregating the data and
sending it to the base station.
          High-capacity node advertises themselves as the CH and others join in proximity. Instead, each node
sends the data directly to BS over a large distance, it then transmits within the cluster over a short distance.
Also, the periodic re-election of CH from residual energy guarantees balanced energy consumption within the
cluster. The efficiency of data transmission is increased by clustering by aggregating the data within the cluster.
Many hierarchical clustering algorithms have been presented in research and deployed for application based
on some parameters. The selection is left with some open issues that need to be addressed especially with the
advent of technologies like the Internet of Things (IoT), Vehicular Ad hoc Networks (VANET). As everything will
be connected through the internet, sensor nodes will be employed to connect things wirelessly for data
transfer. So, security, connectivity, retrieval, and storage of data are some of the challenges facing clustering
techniques in WSN as the network operates in an open environment. This paper focuses on energy-efficient
clustering with specific importance on optimizing energy consumption using Genetic Algorithm and Bacterial
Conjugation Operator.

2.        Theories and related works

2.1      Clustering algorithm in WSN
         The LEACH is regarded as the first and furthermost prominent clustering algorithm in WSN. It is
amenable to a homogenous sensor network. The basic concept is to form clusters based on the strong received
signal strength (RSS) received from the head of clusters. This enables the cluster heads (CHs) to be used as
gateways to reach the destination [3]. The sole aim of introducing LEACH is to reduce power consumption [4].
LEACH segments the network into clusters and each cluster has a leader that rotates roundly. CH sends data
directly to the base station (BS) and uses a data aggregation technique to decrease the energy consumption
of the nodes and extend the lifetime of the network. The operation of LEACH is performed in two stages: setup
and steady-state phase. The cluster setup stage is the one in which each node decides on contending for CH.
The decision depends on the desired percentage of CH in the network and the number of times a node has
been a CH. Sequel to this choice, each node is randomly assigned a value between the values (0 and 1). The
value is then compared with a threshold as in equation (1), if the threshold is greater than the value, the node
is elected as the CH. Then, the CH invites the remaining nodes to join it by broadcasting advertising messages,
and a cluster is made for the current round. The nodes will then be allowed to transmit data to CH by scheduling
time division multiple access (TDMA). In the steady-state stage, data transmission starts and each sensor node
sends according to the time slot. It can then be turned off and the CH should always be ON to receive data
from the sensor nodes.
                            𝑃𝑖
                                        𝑖𝑓 𝑠(𝑖) ∈ 𝐺
         𝑇(𝑠𝑖) = { 1−𝑃𝑖(𝑟 𝑚𝑜𝑑 1⁄𝑃𝑖 )                                                                 (1)
                   0                       𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒

LEACH-M is a Mobile-WSN protocol that provides a highly flexible routing method to deal with CH selection
and regular changes in topology. The implementation is based on the following equations

          𝐸𝑇 (𝑙, 𝑑) = 𝐸𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐 ∗ 𝐿 + 𝜀𝑎𝑚𝑝 ∗ 𝐿 ∗ 𝑑 2                                                          (2)
          𝐸𝑅 (𝑙, 𝑑) = 𝐸𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑐 ∗ 𝐿                                                                           (3)


                                                        76
Bala et al.                                                            J. Sustainable Eng. & Technol. 1(1): 75 – 81 (2024)

 The detection threshold is represented as 𝑃𝑡ℎ𝑟𝑒𝑠ℎ . The packet is discarded when the received power is lower
than the threshold, because it cannot be detected and received. However, if the power obtained is higher than
the threshold, the reception of the packet is successful. According to Kim etal., LEACH-M is used to confirm
that a node is capable of communicating within the time slot allotted in TDMA. The main concept of LEACH-
M is to check whether a mobile node is capable of communication with specified CH at TDMA. In LEACH, CH
gathers the sensed info according to TDMA. There is a minor adjustment in the steady state to support mobility.
As shown the fig2. below, CH first sends a request message to member nodes for data transmission. CH will
include node time slot type when the data is sent by the nodes, which data is received by labeling the nodes
from which data is received at the end of the data frame in the time slot. If at the end of the frame, the data is
not obtained from the same node, it is removed from the cluster due to mobility. The node which is discarded
or did not receive a request message for two successive frames should join a new cluster.

2.2       Optimizing Clustering using Genetic Algorithm


         To build a well-functional design, optimization is needed according to the requirements. To achieve
the desired objective of minimizing energy consumption or maximizing the existence of the network, network
optimization is necessary. Energy consumption, security, network life, and packet delivery ratio are some
routing challenges in a WSN.
Genetic algorithm (GA) is a computational model used to solve optimization problems by imitating genetic
processes in the context of evolutionary theory. Genetic operators like selection, reproduction(crossover), and
mutation are used to mimic biological evolution. In GA, a population is initialized and each individual
symbolizes a possible solution. The important stage of the evolutionary process is using the fitness function to
find individuals that are close to the best solution for the problem and with the help of crossover, individuals
with the highest fitness are combined to form new individuals. It considers that the possible arrangement of a
problem is an entity and that an arrangement of parameters may convey it. Parameters are seen as
chromosome genes and can be organized in binary figures by a series of values. A positive value called fitness
value is used to address the problem to represent the level of goodness of the chromosome, and this value is
firmly identified with its objective value [5].
         The best clustering strategy is very difficult to find in a large-scale wireless sensor network. In clustering
protocols, meta-heuristic methods such as genetic algorithms, particle swarm optimization, fuzzy-based
algorithms, and ant colony algorithms are also used. In this section, a comparative study of clustering,
optimization-based clustering, and multi hop routing using Genetic algorithm is highlighted.
Research on energy-efficient adaptive clustering protocol based on Genetic Algorithm and Genetic Algorithm
inter-cluster communication is presented in [6]. In the work, a comparison is made among LEACH, inter
clustering in LEACH, and optimized LEACH using GA. The author uses the base station as the determinant to
select the cluster head by introducing the preparation phase in the GA-based adaptive clustering to eliminate
the effect of a probability value on the network performance. In [7], an energy-efficient GA method using
Virtual Grid-based dynamic route adjustment is introduced. Total energy and total distance i.e., the location
from the origin to the destination and energy of nodes form the fitness function. The best location for the
highest fitness is represented by a line and the optimal route to reduce overhead. In [8], a hierarchical clustered
sensor network is presented to select cluster heads with the help of GA. The Genetic Algorithm performs
hierarchical clustering with parameters like distance, remaining energy, and concentration- to constitute the
fitness function. Type-2 fuzzy logic is also used to achieve hierarchical clustering. The two methods are then
compared in each cluster with equal and random distribution. The performance of the two methods is
evaluated by considering the number of alive nodes, dead node counts, and residual energy. GA is also used
with some adjustments for evaluation in the work presented in Multi-hop optimization in WSN using GA [9].
The distance and energy consumption are used to optimize the path to the nearest neighbour. One or more
sinks are deployed with a variable number of sensor nodes for the sake of simulation. Enhanced GA energy
efficient Multi-hop Path in WSN is proposed in [10]. The optimal multi-hop path between the source cluster
heads and destination through the intermediate node is found using the new Optimal Multi-hop Path Finding
Method (OMPFM). The approach also improves LEACH by modifying the CH selection and the chromosome is
enhanced using GA. The following form the fitness function; the ratio of CHs included in the path (N par) of the
participating CHs and the average distance from the source, CH, and the intermediate node. In [11], GA-based
optimized LEACH protocol for energy-efficient WSN. LEACH and GA are utilized for energy-effective routing.

                                                          77
Bala et al.                                                                  J. Sustainable Eng. & Technol. 1(1): 75 – 81 (2024)

LEACH executes the clustering and the data processing while GA optimizes the routing. The residual energy of
the nodes is only the fitness function. It is also referred as OLEACH. The concept of a trusted route is presented
to reduce the search time to store the route if the transmitted data repeats. Also, GA-based clustering approach
for WSN to optimize routing techniques is elucidated in [12]. The cluster head establishes an equilibrium
between the load and a suitable path between the sensor node and sink. The intermediate CHs and CH
communicate in the chain-like system to reach the BS.
It is a point to observe that all the works presented in the section above used GA to optimize LEACH but few
consider Mobile LEACH (LEACH-M). Despite the fact that the network is enhanced in several ways loopholes
such as; insufficient to guarantee an optimal number of clusters, inability to select nodes based on energy and
location cannot ignored [13]. Therefore, considering the speed of network execution, flexibility, and reliability
of LEACH-M, the proposed work is based on optimizing the clustering of LEACH-M using GA and BCO.

2.3        The Proposed Work

           The proposed work is centered on optimizing mobile clustering using GA. In this work, GA is used to
select the best path to transfer the aggregated information from CHs to BS in a bid to reducee energy
consumption and improve the lifetime of the network. The following; the average distance from the source
CH and BS, the percentage of the participated CH from the CHs, and the total number of participations in the
transmission path are considered to formulate the fitness function of the problem.

The work is done in two stages. The first stage focuses on the formation of mobile energy- efficient clustering
using GA. LEACH-M clustering consists of a set up and steady-state phase. Stage 2 is the selection of the
optimal path to send data to BS through CHs. As a result, GA is initiated in each round with the parameters in
the fitness function.

Steps to implement the Proposed Work.

The steps to implement the proposed work optimized with GA are as follows:

      1.   Initialization of parameters
      2.   Energy parameters allocations
      3.   Generation of the initial population for CH selection
      4.   Evaluation of fitness function. The fitness function used is as follows:
                                                     𝑁𝑝𝑎𝑟
                             𝐹(𝑐) = 𝑑(𝐶𝐻𝑠, 𝐵𝑆) + (          ) + 𝑁𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑡                                    (4)
                                                      𝑁
           𝑑(𝐶𝐻𝑠, 𝐵𝑆) is the average distance between CH and BS,
               𝑁𝑝𝑎𝑟
           (          ) is the percentage of participated CH from all participated CH in GA
                𝑁
           𝑁𝑜 𝑜𝑓 𝑃𝑎𝑟𝑡 is the total number of participations in the transmission process [14]
      5.   The population is then updated.
      6.   The population fitness function is then replicated and then compared with the initial one.
      7.   If the successive fitness function is greater than the initial population, then it is considered and the
           next iteration begins. In that round, the best node is then chosen as the CH
      8.   Data is then transmitted between the nodes and CH, then between the CH and the sink
      9.   And, the final fitness parameters are estimated.
      10. A comparison is made between the original population and the recent fitness function. Lower current
           fitness function will lead to an update in the population. This will continue until it becomes greater
           than the initial population.

The steps to implement the proposed work optimized with BCO are as follows:

      1.   The parameters are initialized
      2.   Allotment of energy parameters


                                                                 78
Bala et al.                                                              J. Sustainable Eng. & Technol. 1(1): 75 – 81 (2024)

      3.   The initial population of CH selection is generated
      4.   Initialize the positions
      5.   Prepare the fitness parameters
      6.   Evaluate the population
      7.   Sort the population
      8.   Store the best chromosome
      9.   Perform horizontal Gene Transfer and store the new chromosome
      10. Calculate the number of similar genes
      11. Repeat steps 5 and 6
      12. Perform mutation
      13. Repeat 5and 6
      14. Sort the population
      15. Store the best fit

3.         Results and Discussion

3.1        Results of LEACH-M optimized with GA

          Fifty nodes are dispersed in the field of 100m * 100m dimension. Some of the nodes are labeled as
normal nodes and the others are advanced nodes depending on the energy of the nodes. The network is
demarcated into clusters with the help of the Vinoroi diagram function in MATLAB and nodes in a particular
cluster are differentiated with colors. The demarcation is done in such a way that if the threshold energy is
greater than the energy of any node in a given cluster or CH within the cluster, the such node will be
automatically discarded simply because demarcation changes at each round. In this case, 2000 is taken as the
maximum round. While simulating the network, at the 200th round, a zero number of dead nodes are observed
compared to LEACH where no node is with energy. Figure 1 shows the relationship between the number of
dead and alive nodes at each round. It is observed that the lowest number of dead nodes is observed at the
500th round and at the 2000th round about 120 nodes have exhausted their energy. This indicates GA has
lessened the energy consumption and also improve the lifetime of the overall network by increasing the
stability period of the network.



                            Comparison of Dead Nodes and Alive
              3000

              2500

              2000

              1500

              1000

                500

                  0
                        1        2     3       4       5        6    7         8       9       10      11

                                      Rounds       Number of Deads   Number of Alive

                                Figure 1. Comparison between Dead Nodes and Alive Nodes




3.2        Results of LEACH-M optimized with BCO


                                                           79
Bala et al.                                                                          J. Sustainable Eng. & Technol. 1(1): 75 – 81 (2024)

             In this case, 200 nodes are dispersed in the field of 100m * 100m dimension. The first dead node is
observed in the 1218th round and more than 20 dead nodes are observed in the 2000th round, while the
3000th round yields around 125 dead nodes. Figure 2 shows the relationship between the number of dead and
alive nodes at each round. It is observed that the lowest number of dead nodes is observed at the 1500th
round and at the 3000th round about 125 nodes have exhausted their energy. This means that with the
introduction of BCO in LEACH-M, the energy consumption is reduced when compared with LEACH-M
optimized with GA.


                           Comparison of Dead Nodes and Alive Nodes
      3500

      3000
                                                                                                         3000
      2500
                                                                                         2500
      2000
                                                                         2000
      1500
                                                       1500
      1000
                                        1000
      500
               100 0 200   500 0 200           0 200          2 198             25 175          55 145      125 75
        0
                   1           2               3              4                 5               6               7              8

                                   Rounds      Number of Dead Nodes                 Number of Alive Nodes

                               Figure 2. Comparison between Dead Nodes and Alive Nodes

Table 1. Comparison of Routing Protocols used in the proposed work.
 Routing Protocol           Number of Nodes            Rounds                         Dead Nodes                    Alive Nodes
 LEACH                                100                          20                            20                       80
                                                                   50                            70                       30
                                                                  140                               0                     100
 LEACH-M optimized                     50                         950                               1                     49
 with GA                                                          1200                           25                       25
                                                                  2000                           45                        5
 LEACH-M optimized                    200                         1218                              1                     99
 with BCO                                                         2000                           20                       180
                                                                  3000                          125                       75




4.0          Conclusion

             A comparison between GA and BCO for energy-efficient clustering in wireless sensor network has been
presented. Mobility of the channel head (CH) in the energy clustering (LEACH-M) has been given great
attention due to its role in network stability. Therefore, LEACH-M has been optimized with two different
algorithms; GA and BCO. It was found that optimization of LEACH-M with BCO outperformed in adaptive
clustering than that with GA with less than 25% decrease in energy consumed by the nodes of the network.




4.           REFERENCES


                                                                  80
Bala et al.                                                          J. Sustainable Eng. & Technol. 1(1): 75 – 81 (2024)


[1]      Dong, Y., Chang, H., Zou, Z., & Tang, S. (2010). Energy aware routing algorithm for WSN applications in
         border surveillance. 2010 IEEE International Conference on Technologies for Homeland Security
         (HST). doi:10.1109/ths.2010.5654979
[2]      Li, X.-H., & Guan, Z.-H. (2013). Energy-Aware Routing in Wireless Sensor Networks Using Local
         Betweenness Centrality. International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, 9(5),
         307038. doi:10.1155/2013/307038
[3]      Aslam, N.; Phillips, W.; Robertson, W.; Sivakumar, S. A multi-criterion optimization technique for energy
         efficient cluster formation in wireless sensor networks. Inf. Fusion 2011, 12, 202–212.
[4]      E. Ever, R. Luchmun, L. Mostarda, A. Navarra, and P. Shah, “UHEED - an unequal clustering algorithm
         for wireless sensor networks,” Sensornets 2012.
[5]      P. K. Yadav, Dr. N. L. Prajapati, “An overview of Genetic algorithm and modeling”, International Journal
         of Scientific and Research Publications, vol. 2, no. 9, pp. 1-4, September 2012.
[6]      Deif, D., Gadallah, Y. A comprehensive wireless sensor network reliability metric for critical Internet of
         Things applications. J Wireless Com Network 2017, 145 (2017).
[7]      Dâmaso, A., Rosa, N., & Maciel, P. (2014). Reliability of Wireless Sensor Networks. Sensors, 14(9), 15760–
         15785. doi:10.3390/s140915760
[8]      Jan, B., Farman, H., Javed, H., Montrucchio, B., Khan, M., & Ali, S. (2017). Energy Efficient Hierarchical
         Clustering Approaches in Wireless Sensor Networks: A Survey. Wireless Communications and Mobile
         Computing
[9]      Liu, M., Xu, S., & Sun, S. (2012). An agent-assisted QoS-based routing algorithm for wireless sensor
         networks. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 35(1), 29–36.
[10]      Brijesh L. Kundaliya, Sarman K. Hadia. Routing Algorithms for Wireless Sensor Networks: Analyzed and
         Compared (2019). Wireless Personal Communication
[11]     Sirbu, A., & Alecsandrescu, I.-E. (2017). Enhanced genetic algorithm for energy efficient dynamic ad hoc
         wireless sensor networks. 2017 International Symposium on Signals, Circuits and Systems
         (ISSCS). doi:10.1109/isscs.2017.8034920
[12]     Pratyay Kuila, Prasanta K. Jana (2018). Clustering and Routing Algorithms for Wireless Sensor Network.
         U.S CRC Press
[13]     E. Ever, R. Luchmun, L. Mostarda, A. Navarra, and P. Shah, “UHEED - an unequal clustering algorithm
         for wireless sensor networks,” Sensornets 2012, 2012.
[14]     H. M. Hassan, R. Priyadarshini "Optimization Techniques for IoT Using Adaptive Clustering," 2021
         International Conference on Computing, Communication, and Intelligent Systems (ICCCIS), 2021, pp.
         766-771, doi:10.1109/ICCCIS51004.2021.9397128.
[15]     Kale Navnath Dattatraya, K. Raghava Rao (2021) “Hybrid based cluster head selection for maximizing
         network lifetime and energy efficiency in WSN,” Journal of King Saud University - Computer and
         Information Sciences.
[16]     Yun Xu, Wanguo Liao, Menggui Tian (2021) “An Energy Efficient Routing Protocol for D Wireless Sensor
         Networks” IEEE Sensors Journal.
[17]     Mohammed Al-Salabi, Mohammed Anbar, Tat Chee Wan(2018) “Genetic algorithm based protocols to
         select cluster heads and find multihop path in Wireless Sensor Networks Review,” MATEC Web of
         Conferences




                                                        81
