Int. J. Advanced Intelligence Paradigms, Vol. 18, No. 1, 2021                               3


Distributed genetic algorithm for lifetime coverage
optimisation in wireless sensor networks

         Ali Kadhum Idrees*
         Department of Computer Science,
         University of Babylon,
         Babylon, Iraq
         Email: ali.idrees@uobabylon.edu.iq
         *Corresponding author


         Wathiq Laftah Al-Yaseen
         Kerbala Technical Institute,
         Al-Furat Al-Awsat Technical University,
         56001, Kerbala, Iraq
         Email: inkr.wth@atu.edu.iq

         Abstract: In this paper, a protocol called distributed genetic algorithm for
         lifetime coverage optimisation (DiGALCO) is suggested to preserve the
         coverage and enhance the lifetime of a wireless sensor network (WSN).
         DiGALCO combines three energy-efficient schemes: virtual network
         subdivision into subfields, distributed cluster head selection in each subfield,
         followed by sensor activity scheduling-based genetic algorithm (GA)
         optimisation performed by each cluster head. DiGALCO works into rounds.
         Each round consists of three phases: discovery, cluster head selection and GA
         decision and sensing. The decision process, which results in an activity
         scheduling vector, is achieved by a cluster head node through executing the GA
         to pick out a set of sensors staying active for monitoring through the current
         sensing round. In comparison with other protocols, several experimental results
         were done by using OMNeT++ network simulator show that DiGALCO is
         capable of prolonging the lifetime of WSN and gives enhanced coverage
         performance.

         Keywords: wireless sensor networks; WSN; coverage; network lifetime;
         genetic algorithm; scheduling.

         Reference to this paper should be made as follows: Idrees, A.K. and
         Al-Yaseen, W.L. (2021) ‘Distributed genetic algorithm for lifetime coverage
         optimisation in wireless sensor networks’, Int. J. Advanced Intelligence
         Paradigms, Vol. 18, No. 1, pp.3–24.

         Biographical notes: Ali Kadhum Idrees received his BSc and MSc in
         Computer Science from the University of Babylon, Iraq in 2000 and 2003
         respectively. He received his PhD in Computer Science (wireless networks) in
         2015 from the University of Franche-Comte (UFC), France. He is currently an
         Assistant Professor in Computer Science at the University of Babylon, Iraq. He
         has several research papers in wireless sensor networks (WSNs) and computer
         networks. His research interests include wireless networks, WSNs, SDN,
         IoT, distributed computing, data mining and optimisation in communication
         networks.


Copyright © 2021 Inderscience Enterprises Ltd.
4        A.K. Idrees and W.L. Al-Yaseen

         Wathiq Laftah Al-Yaseen is currently a Lecturer in the Department of
         Computer Systems Techniques at Kerbala Technical Institute in Al-Furat
         Al-Awsat Technical University, Kerbala, Iraq. He received his Master of
         Computer Science from the University of Babylon, Iraq. He received his
         PhD of Computer Science from FTSM/UKM, Malaysia. His research
         interests include artificial intelligence, network security, machine learning and
         bioinformatics.




1   Introduction

The advances in the micro-electronics and wireless communications technologies have
led to emergence of a new type of networks: wireless sensor networks (WSNs). This type
of networks consists of a large tiny low-cost devices (called sensors) deployed in the area
of interest to be monitored. A sensor node can sense, process and forward data over a
wireless communication to a sink node. WSNs can be used in several applications like
smart agriculture, healthcare, nature environment protection, transportation, smart cities,
military, etc. (Akyildiz et al., 2002; Yick et al., 2008). WSN represents as one of the most
important technologies for the future (Rawat et al., 2014). The coverage problem is one
of the essential research topics in WSNs (Fan and Jin, 2010). In WSNs, the quality of
service (QoS) of the sensing task is measured by coverage. The coverage refers to how
well the area of interest is monitored by the deployed nodes with a minimum amount of
energy (Zhu et al., 2012). In the published literature, three types of coverage can be found
(Ghosh and Das, 2008). Area coverage is to cover all the area of interest. Target coverage
is to cover a limited number of points or targets in the area of interest. The main objective
of barrier coverage is to detect an event when it try to cross a barrier such as intrusion
detection or border surveillance. This article focuses on the area coverage.
     It is beneficial to deploy a large number of sensors in the sensing field because of the
limited life of sensor node and the difficulty of replacing the batteries in remote
environments. WSN can exploit the redundant sensors to extend the network lifetime. In
dense WSN, it is unnecessary to turn on all sensors at the same time. The WSN lifetime
would be reduced if all the sensor nodes are turned on at a time. Scheduling scheme is
required to put some sensors in an active state to provide sensing services and put other
sensors in a sleep state to save power thus increase the lifetime of WSN. The main
advantages of scheduling the sensors are to activate a less number of sensors, increase the
battery life of the sensor node, decrease the collision on the channel and extend the WSN
lifetime (Yu et al., 2012).
     This paper makes the following contributions:
1   The work presented in this article concentrates on the area coverage problem,
    with the aim of improving the lifetime of WSN by using an energy-efficient
    scheduling-based genetic algorithm (GA) optimisation. The proposed protocol is
    called distributed genetic algorithm for lifetime coverage optimisation (DiGALCO),
    conserves the coverage and extends the lifetime of WSNs. DiGALCO protocol relies
    on the framework of the distributed lifetime coverage optimisation (DiLCO) protocol
    (Idrees et al., 2015). The main idea of this framework is to exploit spatial and
    temporal subdivision. The sensing field is virtually partitioned into smaller subfields.
         Distributed genetic algorithm for lifetime coverage optimisation                   5

    After that, the lifetime is subdivided into rounds inside each subfield. This way of
    grouping of sensor nodes is similar to clustering. Inside each subregion, the sensor
    nodes cooperate with each other to select the cluster head which will apply the GA to
    provide the best representative set of sensor nodes to take the responsibility of
    sensing during the current round. DiGALCO protocol uses a distributed efficient
    way to select the cluster head inside the subfield.
2   DiGALCO protocol uses a GA instead of optimisation solver in order to schedule
    nodes’ activities periodically inside the subregion. The coverage problem
    formulation is modified to consider nodes centres instead of the primary points
    during solving the optimisation problem.
3   The discrete event simulator OMNeT++ is used to conduct the experimental results
    to illustrate the efficiency of DiGALCO protocol. The DiGALCO protocol has been
    compared to four methods found in the related works: DESK (Vu et al., 2006), GAF
    (Xu et al., 2001), DiLCO protocol published in Idrees et al. (2015) and also to the
    PeCO protocol (Idrees et al., 2016). DiLCO and PeCO use the same framework as
    DiGALCO but they are relayed on GLPK optimisation solver for sensor scheduling.
The rest of this article is organised as follows. Section shows the related literature in the
field. Section 3 is allocated to DiGALCO protocol illustration. Section 4 exhibits the
experimental results conducted using OMNeT++ simulator (Varga, 2003). Finally, we
provide conclusion and future works in Section 5.



2   Related works

Recently, the coverage problem has been received a high attention, which concentrates on
how the physical space could be well monitored after the deployment. Coverage is one of
the QoS parameters in WSNs, which is highly concerned with power depletion Zhu et al.
(2012). The related works of the coverage problem are summarised in this section and the
shortcomings of reviewed approaches are being summarised.
    Xu et al. (2001) proposed a geography-informed energy saving routing algorithm for
ad hoc network, called GAF. In this algorithm, nodes use geographic information of
location to partition the sensing field into fixed small cells. Each cell remains with a
constant size. Every sensor inside a cell has two states either sleep or listen. There is only
one sensor node stays awake within each fixed cell in order to perform the data sensing
and communication tasks. The GPS is used by each sensor node to join itself with a
certain cell. Vu et al. (2006) introduced a distributed energy-efficient scheduling
algorithm for K-coverage in WSNs, called DESK. DESK operates into rounds. The
algorithm requires only onehop neighbour information. With DESK, every sensor
determines its state (Sleep or Active) depending on the perimeter coverage model that
presented by Huang et al. (2005).
    Li et al. (2011) presented a framework to convert any complete coverage problem to
an incomplete coverage with a certain ratio of coverage by means of executing an
algorithm to provide sets with a complete coverage and converting the sets of full
coverage to sets of partial coverage via modifying the range of sensing. Özdemir et al.
(2013) employ a recently developed multiobjective optimisation algorithm, named
6        A.K. Idrees and W.L. Al-Yaseen

multi-objective evolutionary algorithm based on decomposition (MOEA/D) to maintain
the coverage and save the energy simultaneously in WSNs. The aim of the work
presented by Rebai et al. (2014) is to provide a full coverage for a grid by spreading the
required sensor nodes whilst preserving connectivity between the sensor nodes and a
sink. A branch and bound (B&B) method is proposed to optimally resolve this problem.
Mostafaei and Shojafar (2015) presented a new and effective approach for cover set
generation depending on imperialist competitive algorithm (ICA). In order to observe all
the targets in the sensing field, the sensors that have to be chosen in several cover sets are
determined by ICA.
    A learning automata approaches are introduced in the works (Mostafaei and Meybodi,
2013; Mohamadi et al., 2013; Mostafaei et al., 2015) to treat the problem of coverage in
sensor networks. In order to extend the lifetime of the sensor network, the nodes are
scheduled in several sets to cover the sensing field. Amgoth and Jana (2015) suggested an
algorithm named distributed energy and coverage-aware routing (DECAR) to monitor the
sensing field for the longest time as possible in the WSNs. Effective clustering and
cluster head election approaches are used by the algorithm for routing. Bara’a et al.
(2015), the authors introduce a multiobjective disjoint reliable sensor covers problem
(DRSC). Two multiobjective metaheuristic approaches (called MOEA/D and NSGAII)
are used to deal with this problem. They suggested using one heuristic approach instead
of the crossover and mutation operators. The heuristic method incorporates in its
mechanism a problem-specific knowledge. Results show that the positive effect of
suggested heuristic method on the total performance of applied MOEAs. Abdulhalim and
Bara’a (2015) presented a multi-layer metaheuristic approach to maximise the set covers
number and minimise the overall number of nodes utilised by every set cover. The
reliability of coverage of every cover set is improved by using postheuristic operator that
receive the result of the multi-layer GA.
    Idrees et al. (2015) suggested a new protocol named DiLCO to save the energy and
keeps the coverage in WSNs. DiLCO represents an improvement on the previous work
introduced by Idrees et al. (2014). DiLCO protocol is based on two stages. The sensing
field is virtually divided into smaller subregions in the first stage whilst the DiLCO
protocol is distributed inside every node in the network in the second stage. The proposed
protocol performs an election method to select the leader in each small subregion. After
that, the sensor node leader executes an optimisation solver for resolve the node activity
scheduling optimisation to select the best group of nodes that provide a good coverage
and improve the WSN lifetime. DiLCO is periodic and it includes four steps: exchange of
information, selection of the leader, sensor schedule production decision and monitoring.
The simulation results illustrate that DiLCO provides better performance compared with
other existing methods. Idrees et al. (2016) presented a new protocol named PeCO that
based on a new proposed coverage optimisation model. PeCO protocol uses an integer
program to provide an optimal sensor schedule based on the perimeter coverage model
and instead of using points as in DiLCO. The results show that PeCO can improve the
network lifetime and maintain the coverage for a longest time compared with other
methods.
    Several algorithms to maintain the coverage and maximise the network lifetime were
proposed in Cardei and Wu (2006), Wang (2011), Zhu et al. (2012), Valera et al. (2014),
Liang et al. (2014) and Sangwan and Singh (2015).
         Distributed genetic algorithm for lifetime coverage optimisation                7

2.1 Shortcomings
In spite of many energy efficient protocols for maintaining the coverage and improving
the network lifetime in WSNs were proposed, non of them ensure the coverage for the
sensing field with optimal minimum number of active sensor nodes and for a long time.
For example, in a full centralised algorithm, optimal solutions can be given by using
optimisation approaches, but in the same time, a high energy is consumed due to
algorithm execution time and the communications among the sensors in the sensing field.
Therefore, the full centralised approaches are not good candidate to use them especially
in large WSNs. Whilst, a full distributed algorithms can not give optimal solutions
because they use only local information of the neighbouring sensors, but in the same
time, the energy consumption during the communications and executing the algorithm is
highly lower. Whatever the case, this would result in a shorter lifetime coverage in
WSNs.

2.2 Our protocol

In this article, DiGALCO in WSNs, called DiGALCO is suggested. The sensing field is
partitioned into small subregions and a DiGALCO protocol is distributed in each sensor
in the subregion. The WSN lifetime in each subregion is divided into rounds, each round
includes three stages: Discovery, Cluster election, sensor node activity scheduling-based
GA optimisation and sensing. The cluster heads are elected in an independent,
asynchronous and distributed way in all the subregions of the WSN. After that, energy-
efficient activity scheduling mechanism-based GA optimisation is performed by each
cluster head in the subregions. GA optimisation is based on the sensor nodes centres in
order to produce the optimal cover set of active sensor nodes, which are responsible of
sensing during the current round. DiGALCO protocol merges and uses the main
advantages of the centralised and distributed approaches and avoids the most of their
disadvantages.



3   DiGALCO protocol description

In this section, DiGALCO protocol is presented that distributed in each sensor node in
the network. It is based on three energy-efficient techniques: virtual network subdivision,
cluster head election and sensor activity scheduling-based GA optimisation for ensuring
sensing coverage while minimising energy consumption, applied periodically to
efficiently improve the network lifetime.

3.1 Network model

The homogeneous static sensor nodes are deployed in a uniform and random way in the
area of interest. The communication range (Rc) and sensing range (Rs) are the same for all
the sensor nodes. Each sensor node started with a different level of energy. The sensor
network is dense to guarantee a full coverage for the sensing field. Every sensor node
determines its position based on a software (localisation algorithm) or hardware (GPS)
8          A.K. Idrees and W.L. Al-Yaseen

unit. Furthermore, The sensing field is subdivided in a uniform way and the nodes are
localised uniformly over the field. If the distance between two sensor nodes less than or
equal to 2Rs, Then they are called neighbours. The sensor disk model is used by both
sensing and communication ranges.

3.2 Protocol idea
DiGALCO protocol is based on two steps. The sensing field is partitioned uniformly into
smaller virtual subregions in the first step (Idrees et al., 2015). Second, DiGALCO
protocol is then distributed and executed simultaneously in each sensor node in each
subregion. Figure 1 shows proposed DiGALCO protocol.

Figure 1    Proposed DiGALCO protocol (see online version for colours)




As in the DiLCO protocol Idrees et al. (2015), DiGALCO protocol uses the same two
packets during its implementation: INFO packet used for information exchange among
sensor nodes and ActiveSleep packet used to inform sensor nodes to go Sleep or to
remain Active during the monitoring time. Furthermore, every node in the network can
be in one of the following five possible states: computation (sensor applies the
optimisation process), active, sleep, listening and communication (transmitting or
receiving packet). Figure 1 shows that the proposed DiGALCO protocol lifetime is
divided into rounds, where each round is consists of three phases: discovery, cluster head
election and sensor node activity scheduling-based GA optimisation, as well as
monitoring. For each round, there will be only one schedule of sensor nodes responsible
for monitoring the sensing field. This periodic scheduling is useful due to enhancement
the robustness of the network against sensor node failures Idrees et al. (2015). The
flowchart of DiGALCO protocol executed in each sensor node is presented in Figure 2.
    As shown in Figure 2, if remaining power of sj ≥ Eth (the minimum power required by
the sensor to remain active for one round). Then, the sensor node will send and receive
information packets to and from other nodes in the subregion. This packet contains sensor
id, position and resedual power (REj). Once the first phase is completed, each sensor node
in the subregion apply cluster head election procedure to elect the cluster head of the
current subregion. Each sj in the subregion applying equation (1) and for each sensor k, k
 Nj, where Nj is the overall nodes number in the subregion. The node will has a weight
wk to every node k in the subregion. The node k that has the maximum weight wk will be
elected as a head of cluster for this round. All the sensor nodes in the subregion will
apply the same equation (1) and they will have the same winner as cluster head for the
            Distributed genetic algorithm for lifetime coverage optimisation                9

subregion. After that, if the sensor node is cluster head, it will apply a GA to produce the
best schedule for the current round (see Section 3.4).

             REk                 d (k , i)   
      wk    *   
             Emax 
                        *
                            iN j 
                                      1            z
                                         2 * Rs   
                                                                                          (1)
                                                 

           ID 
      z   k  * δ ,     1, k  N j , and δ  0.005
           Nj 

      d (k , i)           xk  xi 2   yk  yi 2                                     (2)

As soon as the GA execution is terminated, the optimal sensor schedule is produced. The
cluster head will send an ActiveSleep packet to each node in the subregion to inform it its
new status. If the node does not represent a cluster head, it waits for ActiveSleep packet
to change its status during monitoring time.

3.3 Coverage problem definition
In this section, the problem of coverage is mathematically modelled. The following
notations are used throughout the section. In a subregion R, a set S of sensor nodes
S = {s1, s2, …, si, …, sS N }, a set C of sensors centres C = {c1, c2, …, cj, …, cS N } and a
set of alive sensors A  S, A = {s1, s2, …, sk, …, sS A }. Find the best representative sensor
node set X, X = {x1, x2, …, xk, …, xS A }, that cover all the sensors centres in the subregion
R with the minimum number of nodes in order to enhance the coverage lifetime of WSN.
               1 if node centre j is covered by node k ,
      Yk , j                                                                            (3)
               0 otherwise.
           1 if node k is Active,
      Xk                                                                                (4)
           0 otherwise.
               SA
      ¡j     Y  X 
               k 1
                           k, j   k                                                       (5)

Hence, the problem of lifetime coverage optimisation is modelled as follow.
              SN
      min     ¡
              j1
                      j                                                                   (6)


Subject to
       SA

        Y  X   1 j  S
       k 1
               k, j        k                 N                                            (7)

      X k  {0, 1}, k  S A                                                              (8)

      ¡ j  N , j  S N                                                                  (9)
10         A.K. Idrees and W.L. Al-Yaseen

Figure 2    The flowchart of DIGALCO protocol (see online version for colours)
         Distributed genetic algorithm for lifetime coverage optimisation               11

3.4 GA for lifetime coverage optimisation
Metaheuristics are a generic search strategies for exploring search spaces for solving the
complex problems. These strategies have to dynamically balance between the
exploitation and the exploration in both the stored experience of search and the space of
search respectively. The solutions with the best quality can be determined in the space of
search by using this balancing. They prevent consume a long time in the areas of the
space of search that are searched or do not produce solutions with the best quality.
Therefore, in order to solve the problem of optimisation and produce a good solution, the
metaheuristic approach is the best candidate, especially with inadequate information or
limited capacity of processing (Bianchi et al., 2009). GA is one of the population-based
metaheuristic approaches that simulates the process of natural selection (Hassanien et al.,
2015). GA starts with a population of random candidate solutions (called individuals or
phenotypes). GA uses genetic operators inspired by natural evolution, such as selection,
mutation, evaluation, crossover and replacement so as to improve the initial population of
candidate solutions. This process repeated until a stopping criterion is satisfied. Since
integer linear programming is NP-hard; (Sherali and Driscoll, 2000), many problem
instances are complicated and so heuristic methods must be used instead. GA is a
metaheuristic technique suitable to solve NP-hard problems and provide approximate
solutions. In comparison with optimisation solvers, GA provides a near optimal solution
with acceptable execution time, as well as it requires a less amount of memory especially
for large size problems. Optimisation solvers provide optimal solution, but they require
higher execution time and amount of memory for large problem.
     In this section, we present a metaheuristic-based GA to solve proposed lifetime
coverage optimisation problem. The proposed GA provides a near optimal schedule for
sensing per round. The proposed GA is based on the mathematical model which is
presented in Section 3.3. Algorithm 1 shows the proposed GA to solve the coverage
lifetime optimisation problem. The new protocol which is based on GA in the decision
phase is named as DiGALCO. The proposed GA can be explained in more details as
follow.
     The GA algorithm can be explained in more detail as follow:
1   Representation: Since the proposed GA’s goal is to find the optimal (or near optimal)
    schedule of the sensor nodes which takes the responsibility of monitoring the
    subregion R in the next phase, a chromosome is defined as a schedule for SA sensor
    nodes and each chromosome contains SA genes. Therefore, the gene of such a
    chromosome is the schedule of a sensor. In other words, the genes corresponding to
    active nodes have the value of one, the others are zero. Figure 3 shows solution
    representation in the proposed GA.
2   Initialise population: The initial population is randomly generated and each
    chromosome in the GA population represents a possible sensors schedule solution to
    cover the entire subregion.
3   Compute ¡ j and penality function Pj: After creating the initial population, each
    individual ind compute the parameters ¡ ind
                                             j  and Pjind [see equations (10) and (11)]
    so as to use them in the next step.
12        A.K. Idrees and W.L. Al-Yaseen

            0
                                                              Y  X   0,
                                                              SA
                                                                     ind    ind
                                                      if            k, j   k
                                                              k 1
       ¡j  
        ind
                                                                                           (10)
                  k 1  Ykind, j  X kind  otherwise.
                         SA
            
            

                S
                                     Y  X   0,
                                     SA
                                                ind     ind
                    N         if
       Pjind                       k 1       k, j    k
                                                                                           (11)
                0           otherwise.

4    Evaluate population: After creating the initial population, each individual is
     evaluated and assigned a fitness value according to the fitness function that
     illustrated in equation (12). In the proposed GA, the optimal (or near optimal)
     candidate solution, is the one with the minimum value for the fitness function. The
     lower the fitness values been assigned to an individual, the better opportunity it get
     survived. In the proposed work, the function rewards the decrease in the sensor
     nodes which cover the same sensor centre and penalises the decrease to zero in the
     sensor nodes which cover the sensor centre.
                  SN
       F ind    ¡  P 
                  j 1
                               ind
                                j
                                          ind
                                          j                                                (12)


5    Selection: In order to generate a new generation, a portion of the existing population
     is elected based on a fitness function that ranks the fitness of each candidate solution
     and preferentially select the best solutions. A best individual selection (BIS) is used
     by the proposed GA. By using BIS, a best two individuals are selected from the
     current population based on fitness values of individuals. The selected best two
     individuals sent to the mating pool.
6    Crossover: Crossover is a genetic operator used to take more than one parent
     solutions and produce a child solution from them. If crossover probability Pc is
     100%, then the crossover operation takes place between two individuals. If it is 0%,
     the two selected individuals in the mating pool will be the new chromosomes without
     crossover. In the proposed GA, a two-point crossover is used. The two-point
     crossover is explained in Figure 4.
7    Mutation: Mutation is a divergence operation which introduces random
     modifications. The purpose of the mutation is to maintain diversity within the
     population and prevent premature convergence. Mutation is used to add new genetic
     information (divergence) in order to achieve a global search over the solution search
     space and avoid to fall in local optima. The mutation operator in the proposed GA
     works as follow: If mutation probability Pm is 100%, then the mutation operation
     takes place on the new individual. Two different indices are selected randomly
     within the schedule solution. After that, the contents of the positions are exchanged.
     If mutation probability Pm is 0%, then the mutation operation does not take place.
8    Before evaluating each new individual, update ¡ind 1 , Pind1, ¡ind 2 , and Pind2 of
     Childind1 and Childind2 respectively using equations (10) and 11.
              Distributed genetic algorithm for lifetime coverage optimisation         13

9       Evaluate new individuals: After updating the parameters ¡ j and Pj, each new
        individual is evaluated using equation (12).
10 Replacement: After evaluation of new children, Triple Tournament Replacement
   (TTR) will be applied for each new individual. In TTR strategy, three individuals are
   selected randomly from the population. Find the worst from them and then check its
   fitness with the new individual fitness. If the fitness of the new individual is better
   than the fitness of the worst individual, replace the new individual with the worst
   one. Otherwise, the replacement is not done.
11 Stopping criteria: The proposed GA ends its execution as soon as one of two
   stopping criteria is reached, which make use of two parameters, called MaxIter and
   MaxMinFit respectively. The MaxIter parameter refers to a maximum number of
   iterations that performed by the GA. The MaxMinF it is met when the maximum
   fitness value in the population is equal to the minimum fitness value. The best
   solution will be chosen as a schedule of sensor nodes for the sensing phase in the
   current round.
Algorithm 1 GA(sj)

    Input: Spop, Pc, Pm and SA
    Output: X = {x1, x2, …, xk, …, xS A }, the schedule of sensor nodes

    foreach Individual ind  Spop do
       Generate Randomly Chromosome X;
       Compute ¡ ind and Pind;
       Evaluate Individual Xind;
    end
    while Stopping criteria is not satisfied do
       Selection (ind1, ind2);
       Crossover
       (Pc, Xind1, Xind2, Childind1, Childind2);
       Mutation (Pm, Childind1, Childind2);
       Update ¡ind 1 and Pind1 of Childind1;
       Update ¡ ind 2 and Pind2 of Childind2;
       Evaluate New Individuals Childind1 and Childind2;
       Replacement (Childind1, Childind2);
    end
    {(X1, …, Xk, …, xS A )} = Select Best Solution
    (Spop);
    return X;
14         A.K. Idrees and W.L. Al-Yaseen

Figure 3    Solution representation by the proposed GA, (a) sensors status inside the subregion
            (b) candidate solution represented by chromosome for the sensors in (a) (see online
            version for colours)




                                                (a)




                                                (b)


Figure 4    Two-point crossover (see online version for colours)




4    Performance evaluation and analysis

The performance of DiGALCO protocol is evaluated by achieving several experiments
using OMNeT++ network simulator (Varga, 2003). Table 1 illustrates the parameters
used in this simulation.
    Fifty executions are achieved using various WSN topologies. The introduced results
are an average of these 50 executions. Five network sizes (100 to 300 nodes) are used by
           Distributed genetic algorithm for lifetime coverage optimisation            15

the simulations. The nodes are deployed in a controlled way over a sensing field of
(50 × 25) m2 to ensure initial full coverage with current sensing range. The sensing field
of WSN is assumed to be partitioned into 16 regular subregions and the proposed
protocol used the same energy model that explained in Idrees et al. (2015).
Table 1      Parameters used during the simulations

 Parameter                                               Value
 Sensing field                                        (50 × 25) m2
 Nodes number                            100, 150, 200, 250 and 300 nodes
 Initial energy                                  500–700 Joules
 Sensing period                                       60 minutes
 Ethr                                                  36 Joules
 Rs                                                       5m
 Rc                                                      10 m
 Pc                                                      0.95
 Pm                                                       0.5
 MaxIter                                                 1,000
 Spop                                                     50

Each sensor node initialised its power randomly within the range [500–700]. In the
experimentations, the same performance metrics that used by Idrees et al. (2015) are used
to evaluate the efficiency of DiGALCO protocol. These metrics are coverage ratio (CR),
active sensors ratio (ASR), network lifetime and energy consumption. Besides
DiGALCO, four other methods are used for the purpose of comparison. These methods
are DESK (Vu et al., 2006), GAF (Xu et al., 2001), DiLCO protocol (Idrees et al., 2015)
and PeCO protocol (Idrees et al., 2016). The same framework is used by DiGALCO,
PeCO and DiLCO protocols. These protocols are used different mathematical models and
optimisation approaches so as to provide the best schedule of sensor nodes for monitoring
in the sensing phase. DiLCO protocol attempts to ensure the full area coverage by
covering a set of points in the sensing field. PeCO protocol tries to provide a certain
coverage level for every sensor perimeter. DiLCO and PeCO used an integer program
that implemented by the GLPK optimisation solver. DiGALCO protocol attempts to fulfil
the coverage of centre points of sensor nodes. DiGALCO protocol uses GA to optimise
both coverage and network lifetime.

4.1 Coverage ratio
The average ratio of coverage of the five protocols for 200 nodes is shown in Figure 5.
For the first rounds, DESK, GAF and DiLCO produce a lightly better ratio of coverage
(with respectively 99.99%, 99.91% and 99.02%), in comparison with the (98.76% and
97.88%) provided by PeCO and DiGALCO respectively. The reason behind this is that
DiGALCO, PeCO and DiLCO turn off a larger number of redundant nodes compared
with GAF and DESK protocols. After the round 33th, DiGALCO protocol gives better
coverage performance compared with other approaches and maintains a level of coverage
bigger than 80% for a larger number of rounds. This increased performance of coverage
caused by a large amount of saved energy by DiGALCO in the first rounds.
16         A.K. Idrees and W.L. Al-Yaseen

4.2 Active sensors ratio
In each round, it is necessary to decrease the active nodes number in order to conserve a
large amount of power and consequently to maximise the WSN lifetime. Figure 6
exhibits the ratio of average active nodes for 200 deployed nodes. In the first fourteen
rounds, DESK and GAF activate 30.36 % and 34.96 % nodes whilst DiLCO, PeCO and
DiGALCO activate 17.92 %, 20.16 % and 19.64 % active sensor nodes respectively.
DiGALCO protocol activates a higher nodes number when the rounds number increases
compared with PeCO, DESK and GAF in order to provide a higher level of coverage as
displayed in Figure 5.

Figure 5    CR for 200 deployed nodes (see online version for colours)




4.3 Energy consumption
This section presents the impact of energy consumed by the network during the different
status of sensor nodes (such as communication, computation, listening, active and sleep
status) for various WSN sizes and the comparison with other approaches is investigated.
Figures 7(a) and 7(b) exhibit the consumed energy for various WSN sizes and for
Lifetime95 and Lifetime50. The comparison illustrates the superiority of DiGALCO in the
power saving. The two figures show the reduced consumption of energy by DiGALCO
compared with other approaches. When the network size is greater than 200 nodes, the
consumed energy is the lowest with PeCO for Lifetime50.
           Distributed genetic algorithm for lifetime coverage optimisation           17

Figure 6    ASR for 200 deployed nodes (see online version for colours)




4.4 Network lifetime
The comparison results show that DiGALCO and DiLCO provide a better lifetime
improvement for Lifetime95, whilst DiGALCO and PeCO give the best results for
Lifetime50. In Figures 8(a) and 8(b), Lifetime95 and Lifetime50 are exhibited for various
WSN densities. These figures show that DiGALCO, DiLCO and PeCO enhance the
network lifetime when the WSN size increases. In the network lifetime for Lifetime95
[see Figure 8(a)], DiGALCO protocol can enhance the network lifetime up to 4.7%,
32.6%, 24.4% and 14% compared to DiLCO, DESK, GAF and PeCO protocols
respectively. In the network lifetime for Lifetime50 [see Figure 8(b)], DiGALCO protocol
can enhance the network lifetime up to 17.2%, 46%, 25.4% compared to DiLCO, DESK
and GAF protocols respectively, Whilst, PeCO protocol enhance the network lifetime up
to 2.4% compared to DiGALCO protocol.
    Figure 9 shows the comparison results among three protocol (DiLCO, PeCO and
DiGALCO) from the coverage lifetime point of view and for various levels of coverage.
The network able to provide a coverage level higher than 80%, 85%,90% and 95% by
Protocol/80, Protocol/85, Protocol/90 and Protocol/95 respectively, where the word
Protocol refers to DiGALCO, PeCO, or DiLCO. In fact, some applications do not need a
full coverage in all the time, for instance, forest fire application requires only 80%
coverage level in the rainy seasons whilst it requires a full coverage in the summer
seasons Li et al. (2011). DiGALCO always outperforms PeCO and DiLCO for all levels
of coverage. Furthermore, the enhancement increases when the network size increases.
18         A.K. Idrees and W.L. Al-Yaseen

Figure 7    Energy consumption per period for (a) Lifetime95 and (b) Lifetime50 (see online version
            for colours)




                                                 (a)




                                                 (b)
           Distributed genetic algorithm for lifetime coverage optimisation                           19

Figure 8    Network lifetime for (a) Lifetime95 and (b) Lifetime50 (see online version for colours)




                                                  (a)




                                                 (b)
20         A.K. Idrees and W.L. Al-Yaseen

Figure 9    Network lifetime for different CRs (see online version for colours)




4.5 Discussions
This section discuss the feasibility of our protocol in a real limited resources wireless
sensor better than existing distributed techniques. The average execution time is required
to solve our proposed coverage optimisation problem is reported for several methods and
different network sizes. We compute the original execution time on a DELL laptop with
Intel Core i3 2370 M (2.4 GHz) processor (2 cores) and the MIPS (Million Instructions
Per Second) rate equal to 35330. In order to be compatible with the use of a sensor node
with Atmels AVR ATmega103L microcontroller (6 MHz) and a MIPS rate equal to 6 to
                                                              35330 1 
run the optimisation resolution, this time is multiplied by           and reported on
                                                              2       6
Figure 10.
    Figure 10 shows that DiGALCO protocol has lower execution times in comparison
with other methods due to utilising a metaheuristic method (GA) to find good
approximate solutions for the coverage optimisation problem instead of using the
optimisation solver.
    In practice, executing GLPK (GNU linear Programming Kit available in the public
domain) on a sensor node is obviously intractable because it consumes a huge memory
inside the sensor node. Therefore, a lightweight heuristic can be a good candidate to solve
the optimisation problem. From the space complexity point of view, DiGALCO protocol
takes O(SA Spop) as space complexity. If we consider a WSN of 300 nodes, the number of
sensor nodes in each subregion is 18.5. Therefore, each cluster head in the subregion will
execute the GA with a maximum number of sensor nodes equal to 19 nodes. In our
         Distributed genetic algorithm for lifetime coverage optimisation              21

simulation, we represent the chromosome as a vector of integer values and we consider
Spop to 50. The memory needed by our protocol is composed of two parts: the constant
space plus the variable space. The variable part of space is nearly equal to 1.9 KB (19 *
2 bytes * 50 = 1,900 bytes). Since each sensor node (Medusa II) which uses Atmels AVR
ATmega103L microcontroller has 128 KB of memory, therefore, this can ensure that our
proposed GA can be executed by real sensor node.

Figure 10 Execution time (in seconds) (see online version for colours)




DiGALCO protocol optimise both the coverage and lifetime in each subregion of the
WSN. It is a hybrid of centralised and distributed methods. It is a distributed on the
subregions obtained by dividing the area of interest into subregions and it achieves the
optimisation at each cluster head in the subregions to provide the best schedule of sensor
nodes in a centralised way to preserve the coverage and to enhance the WSN lifetime. To
be acceptable for large-scale networks, the sensing field in the DiGALCO protocol is
partitioned into many smaller subregions. One cluster head will be selected to run the
optimisation algorithm (GA) to provide the active sensors for the current round.
Therefore, DiGALCO protocol is scalable and a globally distributed approach, whilst it is
centralised in each subregion. In the full distributed approaches, the decision is based
only on the local information from the neighbouring nodes and there is no optimisation.
This is why our DiGALCO protocol is better than existing distributed techniques because
of applying a distributed optimisation on the subregions. The comparison results which
are explained in the Sections 4.1–4.4 ensure the superiority of our proposed DiGALCO
protocol in comparison with other existing techniques.
22        A.K. Idrees and W.L. Al-Yaseen

5    Conclusions and future works

The optimisation of lifetime coverage problem in sensor networks has been investigated
in this article. A protocol named DiGALCO for maintaining the coverage and enhance
the lifetime is proposed. DiGALCO is responsible for scheduling the sensor nodes
activities periodically. DiGALCO is distributed inside the nodes in the subregions that
obtained after dividing the sensing field in the first phase. It works into rounds and is
based on the GA to choose the schedule of sensor nodes operating in active status for
each round. In a subregion, DiGALCO is responsible for selecting the cluster head sensor
node which will then apply a GA for activity scheduling of sensor nodes. The main
challenges include how to elect the cluster head efficiently in the subregion as well as
selecting the best schedule of sensor nodes to maintain a good CR. Several simulations
have been performed to assess the performance of DiGALCO. The results illustrate that
DiGALCO protocol is better than other methods in terms of lifetime, coverage level,
active nodes ratio and consumed energy. In future, we plan to extend our work so that the
optimisation algorithm provides multiple sensing rounds schedule. In addition, the
optimisation model can be improved to consider into account the heterogeneity of the
nodes in the network.


References
Abdulhalim, M.F. and Bara’a, A.A. (2015) ‘Multi-layer genetic algorithm for maximum disjoint
    reliable set covers problem in wireless sensor networks’, Wireless Personal Communications,
    Vol. 80, No. 1, pp.203–227.
Akyildiz, I.F., Su, W., Sankarasubramaniam, Y. and Cayirci, E. (2002) ‘A survey on sensor
    networks’, IEEE Communications Magazine, Vol. 40, No. 8, pp.102–114.
Amgoth, T. and Jana, P.K. (2015) ‘Energy and coverage-aware routing algorithm for wireless
   sensor networks’, Wireless Personal Communications, Vol. 81, No. 2, pp.531–545.
Bara’a, AA., Khalil, E.A., Özdemir, S. and Yıldız, O. (2015) ‘A multi-objective disjoint set covers
    for reliable lifetime maximization of wireless sensor networks’, Wireless Personal
    Communications, Vol. 81, No. 2, pp.819–838.
Bianchi, L., Dorigo, M., Gambardella, L.M. and Gutjahr, W.J. (2009) ‘A survey on metaheuristics
    for stochastic combinatorial optimization’, Natural Computing: an International Journal,
    Vol. 8, No. 2, pp.239–287.
Cardei, M. and Wu, J. (2006) ‘Energy-efficient coverage problems in wireless ad-hoc sensor
    networks’, Computer Communications, Vol. 29, No. 4, pp.413–420.
Fan, G. and Jin, S. (2010) ‘Coverage problem in wireless sensor network: a survey’, Journal of
     Networks, Vol. 5, No. 9, pp.1033–1040.
Ghosh, A. and Das, S.K. (2008) ‘Coverage and connectivity issues in wireless sensor networks: a
    survey’, Pervasive and Mobile Computing, Vol. 4, No. 3, pp.303–334.
Hassanien, A.E., Grosan, C. and Tolba, M.F. (2015) Applications of Intelligent Optimization in
    Biology and Medicine, Springer.
Huang, C.F. and Tseng, Y.C. (2005) ‘The coverage problem in a wireless sensor network’, Mobile
    Networks and Applications, Vol. 10, No. 4, pp.519–528.
Idrees, A.K., Deschinkel, K., Salomon, M. and Couturier, R. (2014) ‘Coverage and lifetime
     optimization in heterogeneous energy wireless sensor networks’, ICN 2014, p.60.
          Distributed genetic algorithm for lifetime coverage optimisation                     23

Idrees, A.K., Deschinkel, K., Salomon, M. and Couturier, R. (2015) ‘Distributed lifetime coverage
     optimization protocol in wireless sensor networks’, The Journal of Supercomputing, Vol. 71,
     No. 12, pp.4578–4593.
Idrees, A.K., Deschinkel, K., Salomon, M. and Couturier, R. (2016) ‘Perimeter-based coverage
     optimization to improve lifetime in wireless sensor networks’, Engineering Optimization,
     Vol. 48, No. 11, pp.1951–1972.
Li, Y., Vu, C., Ai, C., Chen, G. and Zhao, Y. (2011) ‘Transforming complete coverage algorithms
     to partial coverage algorithms for wireless sensor networks’, IEEE Transactions on Parallel
     and Distributed Systems, Vol. 22, No. 4, pp.695–703.
Liang, J., Liu, M. and Kui, X. (2014) ‘A survey of coverage problems in wireless sensor networks’,
    Sensors and Transducers, Vol. 163, No. 1, pp.240.
Mohamadi, H., Ismail, A.S., Salleh, S. and Nodehi, A. (2013) ‘Learning automata-based algorithms
   for solving the target coverage problem in directional sensor networks’, Wireless Personal
   Communications, Vol. 73, No. 3, pp.1309–1330.
Mostafaei, H. and Meybodi, M.R. (2013) ‘Maximizing lifetime of target coverage in wireless
    sensor networks using learning automata’, Wireless Personal Communications, Vol. 71, No. 2,
    pp.1461–1477.
Mostafaei, H. and Shojafar, M. (2015) ‘A new metaheuristic algorithm for maximizing lifetime of
    wireless sensor networks’, Wireless Personal Communications, Vol. 82, No. 2, pp.723–742.
Mostafaei, H., Chowdhury, M.U., Islam, R. and Gholizadeh, H. (2015) ‘Connected P-percent
    coverage in wireless sensor networks based on degree constraint dominating set approach’, in
    Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Conference on Modeling, Analysis and Simulation
    of Wireless and Mobile Systems, pp.157–160.
Mostafaei, H., Esnaashari, M. and Meybodi, M.R. (2015) ‘A coverage monitoring algorithm based
    on learning automata for wireless sensor networks’, Appl. Math, Vol. 9, No. 3, pp.1–9.
Özdemir, S. and Bara’a, A.A. and Khalil, Ö.A. (2013) ‘Multi-objective evolutionary algorithm
    based on decomposition for energy efficient coverage in wireless sensor networks’, Wireless
    Personal Communications, Vol. 71, No. 1, pp.195–215.
Rawat, P., Singh, K.D., Chaouchi, H. and Bonnin, J.M. (2014) ‘Wireless sensor networks: a survey
   on recent developments and potential synergies’, The Journal of Supercomputing, Vol. 68,
   no. 1, pp.1–48.
Rebai, M., Le Berre, M., Hnaien, F., Snoussi, H. and Khoukhi, L. (2014) ‘A branch and bound
    algorithm for the critical grid coverage problem in wireless sensor networks’, International
    Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, Vol. 10, No. 2, p.9.
Sangwan, A. and Singh, R.P. (2015) ‘Survey on coverage problems in wireless sensor networks’,
    Wireless Personal Communications, Vol. 80, No. 4, pp.1475–1500.
Sherali, H.D. and Driscoll, P.J. (2000) ‘Evolution and state-of-the-art in integer programming’,
    Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, Vol. 124, No. 1, pp.319–340.
The Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia [online] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/.
Valera, A.C., Soh, W.S. and Tan, H.P. (2014) ‘Survey on wakeup scheduling for
    environmentally-powered wireless sensor networks’, Computer Communications, Vol. 52,
    pp.21–36.
Varga, A. (2003) OMNeT++ Discrete Event Simulation System [online] http://www.omnetpp.org.
Vu, C.T., Gao, S., Deshmukh, W.P. and Li, Y. (2006) ‘Distributed energy-efficient scheduling
    approach for k-coverage in wireless sensor networks’, in IEEE Military Communications
    Conference, MILCOM 2006, pp.1–7.
Wang, B. (2011) ‘Coverage problems in sensor networks: a survey’, ACM Computing Surveys
   (CSUR), Vol. 43, No. 4, p.32.
24       A.K. Idrees and W.L. Al-Yaseen

Xu, Y., Heidemann, J. and Estrin, D. (2001) ‘Geography-informed energy conservation for ad hoc
    routing’, in Proceedings of the 7th Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing
    and Networking, pp.70–84.
Yick, J., Mukherjee, B. and Ghosal, D. (2008) ‘Wireless sensor network survey’, Computer
    Networks, Vol. 52, No. 12, pp.2292–2330.
Yu, J., Ren, S., Wan, S., Yu, D. and Wang, G. (2012) ‘A stochastic-coverage scheduling algorithm
     in wireless sensor networks’, International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks.
Zhu, C., Zheng, C., Shu, L. and Han, G. (2012) ‘A survey on coverage and connectivity issues in
    wireless sensor networks’, Journal of Network and Computer Applications, Vol. 35, No. 2,
    pp.619–632.
