Article

A Two-Phase Genetic Algorithm Approach for Sleep Scheduling,
Routing, and Clustering in Heterogeneous Wireless
Sensor Networks
Sarah Abdulelah Abbas, Leili Farzinvash *                     and Mina Zolfy


                                         Faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Tabriz, Tabriz 5166616471, Iran;
                                         saraabd@tabrizu.ac.ir (S.A.A.); mzolfy@tabrizu.ac.ir (M.Z.)
                                         * Correspondence: l.farzinvash@tabrizu.ac.ir


                                         Abstract
                                         Heterogeneous wireless sensor networks (HWSNs), comprising super nodes and normal
                                         sensors, offer a promising solution for monitoring diverse environments. However, their
                                         deployment is constrained by the limited battery life of sensors. To address this issue,
                                         clustering and routing techniques have been employed to conserve energy. Nevertheless,
                                         existing approaches often struggle with suboptimal energy distribution and weak network
                                         coverage. Additionally, they mostly failed to exploit other energy saving techniques such
                                         as sleep scheduling. This paper proposes a novel genetic algorithm (GA)-based approach
                                         to optimize sleep scheduling, routing, and clustering in HWSNs. The method comprises
                                         two phases, namely join sleep scheduling and tree construction, and clustering of normal
                                         nodes. Inspired by the concept of unequal clustering, the HWSN is split into some rings in
                                         the first phase, and the number of awake super nodes in each ring keeps the same. This
                                         approach addresses the challenges of balancing energy consumption and network lifetime.
                                         Furthermore, including network coverage and energy-related criteria in the proposed GA
                                         yields long-lasting network operation. Through rigorous simulations, we demonstrate that,
                                         on average, our algorithm reduces energy consumption and improves network coverage
                                         by 23% and 21.9%, respectively, and extends network lifetime by 501 rounds, compared to
Academic Editor: Luis Alonso
                                         the state-of-the-art methods.
Received: 27 August 2025
                                         Keywords: heterogeneous wireless sensor networks; genetic algorithm; sleep scheduling;
Revised: 24 October 2025
Accepted: 31 October 2025
                                         routing; clustering
Published: 4 November 2025

Citation: Abdulelah Abbas, S.;
Farzinvash, L.; Zolfy, M. A Two-Phase
Genetic Algorithm Approach for Sleep     1. Introduction
Scheduling, Routing, and Clustering            Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have emerged as cost-effective solutions for monitor-
in Heterogeneous Wireless Sensor
                                         ing diverse environments, particularly in harsh or inaccessible conditions. However, their
Networks. Network 2025, 5, 50.
                                         performance and longevity are often limited by the constrained energy resources of sensor
https://doi.org/10.3390/
network5040050                           nodes. To overcome this issue, heterogeneous WSNs (HWSNs) have been introduced [1–3],
                                         incorporating two types of nodes: normal sensors and super nodes [4,5]. Normal nodes are
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
                                         responsible for sensing tasks, while super nodes aggregate and forward data to the Base
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article   Station (BS). By employing high-energy super nodes as cluster heads (CHs), HWSNs can
distributed under the terms and          improve energy efficiency, extend network lifetime, and enhance data delivery.
conditions of the Creative Commons             Despite these advantages, super nodes consume energy more rapidly due to their
Attribution (CC BY) license              heavier communication and computation load, which can shorten network lifetime. There-
(https://creativecommons.org/
                                         fore, achieving energy-efficient data gathering with balanced energy usage among super
licenses/by/4.0/).




Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                           https://doi.org/10.3390/network5040050
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                            2 of 28



                      nodes remains a critical challenge. Existing studies have explored several strategies such as
                      clustering [6,7], routing [8,9], clustering and routing [4,5,10–12], and sleep scheduling [13],
                      to address this issue. The proposed algorithms in [4,5,10–12], which used both clustering
                      and routing for efficient energy management, used different meta-heuristic algorithms
                      such as genetic algorithm (GA) [5,12,14] and gray wolf optimization (GWO) [11]. Most
                      of these algorithms arranged clustering and routing into two phases and solved them
                      consecutively. These studies mainly lacked customized chromosome/particle represen-
                      tations, problem-specific operators/decoding methods, and effective cost functions. The
                      other main drawback of the mentioned methods is that most of them treated clustering,
                      routing, and sleep scheduling mechanisms separately, without considering their strong
                      interdependence. A more integrated approach can yield better coordination among the
                      mentioned mechanisms, ultimately improving energy efficiency and coverage.
                            To bridge this gap, this paper presents a unified GA-based framework for data collec-
                      tion in HWSNs that jointly optimizes sleep scheduling, clustering, and routing. The pro-
                      posed method determines which super nodes should remain awake, constructs an energy-
                      efficient routing tree among them, and assigns normal nodes to appropriate CHs. To man-
                      age complexity, the problem is divided into two GA-optimized phases: (1) simultaneous
                      sleep scheduling and tree construction among super nodes, and (2) clustering of normal
                      nodes based on awake CHs. Each phase employs problem-specific chromosome repre-
                      sentations, customized initialization methods, and tailored genetic operators to achieve
                      rapid convergence and effective load balancing. The customized cost functions introduced
                      in both phases further enhance load balancing across super nodes, ensuring prolonged
                      network sustainability.
                            The innovations of this paper can be summarized as follows:
                      •    The proposed solution for reducing the state space effectively addresses the challenges
                           of sleep scheduling, clustering, and tree construction on awake nodes by dividing the
                           process into two phases, each optimized using a GA.
                      •    Considering the strong interdependence between the sleep scheduling of super nodes
                           and the construction of a tree on these nodes—since the tree must be built on awake
                           super nodes—these two problems are tackled simultaneously through an innovative
                           modeling approach.
                      •    In the first phase, a novel cost function is employed to enhance environmental moni-
                           toring by selecting a set of super nodes as awake ones while minimizing the energy
                           consumption of super nodes.
                      •    Network clustering is modeled and optimized using a GA in the second phase, with a
                           new cost function specifically designed to reduce energy consumption with distribut-
                           ing normal nodes among the awake CHs.
                      •    Considering the pivotal role of initialization in the ultimate solution of GA, we propose
                           a custom initialization in the first phase which helps GA to converge more quickly.
                           The proposed method splits the HWSN into rings and selects equal number of awake
                           super nodes per ring. This scheme, which is inspired by unequal clustering, helps
                           balancing energy exhaustion of super nodes and prolongs network lifetime.
                      •    We modify and customize the GA operators (crossover and mutation) to fit our prob-
                           lem and help achieving better solutions.
                      •    The proposed solution has been rigorously evaluated in simulation environments,
                           consistently demonstrating its superiority over existing methods.
                          The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 reviews the related
                      work, while Section 3 outlines the network model. Section 4 provides a comprehensive
                      description of the proposed method, and Section 5 presents the results obtained using this
                      method. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper.
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                           3 of 28



                      2. Related Works
                            We review related research in three key areas. First, we explore sleep scheduling
                      studies on heterogenous and homogenous WSNs. The second part investigates clustering
                      algorithms within the field. Finally, in the last part, we consider research on tree construc-
                      tion and routing protocols. The mentioned algorithms used different techniques for solving
                      considered problems including greedy, meta-heuristic, and learning methods.
                            The literature on sleep scheduling and resource allocation in WSNs explored various
                      approaches to optimize energy efficiency. Alwasel et al. [13] considered HWSNs and
                      proposed an energy-efficient sleep-and-awake scheme to manage sleep states based on
                      node resources, prioritizing network lifetime. In their work, they proposed iterative local
                      search strategy to construct disjoint dominating sets, activating nodes of one dominating
                      set each time instance. The algorithm prioritized nodes with higher residual energy for
                      being awake while transitioning others to sleep mode. However, their method introduced
                      computational complexity due to exhaustive search processes, limiting scalability in large-
                      scale HWSNs. Additionally, it did not consider clustering and routing problems.
                            Sleep scheduling in homogenous WSNs was explored in [15–17]. Niyato et al. [15]
                      used factors like energy level of nodes, the number of packets in their buffers, and chan-
                      nel condition, to determine sleep scheduling policies for solar-powered networks. The
                      algorithm aimed to awaken nodes with higher energies, less congested buffers, and better
                      channel conditions. The proposed method in [18] clustered sensor nodes and determined
                      the sleep nodes per cluster based on the correlation of generated data by Cluster Members
                      (CMs). The algorithm constructed a graph considering the correlation degree between the
                      neighboring nodes and applied it to determine sleep and awake nodes. Bertanha et al. [19]
                      performed sleep scheduling in two phases. A greedy algorithm was proposed for sleep
                      scheduling in the first phase, which only focused on preserving connectivity throughout the
                      network and did not take into account the coverage. For routing data packets, a next-hop
                      toward the BS was adopted per node in the second phase, considering its residual energy
                      and distance from the BS. References [16,17,20–22] employed Reinforcement Learning (RL)
                      to determine the awake and sleep schedule of the nodes. Studies in [16,17,20] developed
                      RL-driven sleep scheduling for star topology networks. Among the mentioned algorithms,
                      references [17,22] focused on wireless body area networks, and considered criteria such as
                      energy level of nodes, emergency of gathered data by sensors, and transmission delay, to
                      decide on awake/sleep statuses of sensors. The algorithm proposed in [21] determined
                      CHs and performed clustering using a greedy approach, followed by applying RL for
                      sleep scheduling.
                            Clustering is vital in WSNs for efficient data collection and transmission. Mughal
                      et al. [7] introduced a RL-based clustering model for IoT and HWSNs, aimed at optimizing
                      resource utilization and reducing energy consumption. In [23], a scheme was presented that
                      categorized sensors into normal and super nodes based on initial energy levels. Clusters
                      were formed with energy-efficient CH selection, which prioritize super nodes by assigning
                      more weights to them. Bhasker et al. [24] introduced a cluster-based data gathering
                      technique for farm irrigation systems, focusing on reducing sensor node energy use and
                      balancing the workload on CHs. They proposed a method that selects and rotates CHs
                      near the energy centroid within clusters and designates gateway nodes to assist CHs. In
                      the proposed algorithm in [25], CH selection was guided by a fitness function derived
                      from multi-objective optimization. The objectives included minimizing energy usage and
                      the distance between CHs and their CMs. The algorithm applied deep residual network
                      to optimize number of clusters and CH selection. Afterwards, the Binary Horse Herd
                      Optimization (BHHO) algorithm was used for route selection and data transmission.
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                            4 of 28



                            The problem of routing in homogenous WSNs has been widely studied in the literature.
                      Gupta et al. [26] assumed an event-driven system model in which a node sends packets
                      upon detecting an event, such as the temperature exceeding a predefined threshold. The
                      algorithm conserved energy by omitting redundant data packets generated by different
                      sensor nodes. Chaurasia et al. [27] integrated Q-learning with Bald Eagle Search (BES).
                            Q-learning was used to evaluate the properness of closer neighbors to the BS per
                      node for selection as its next-hop. The obtained Q-values were used by BES to construct
                      best routes toward the BS. The considered criteria in BES were the amount of energy
                      consumption and network lifetime. Reference [28] considered both residual energy of
                      nodes and network load to improve energy efficiency and packet delivery. The algorithm
                      used GWO to route construction. To construct the routing tree, the proposed algorithm
                      in [29] first estimated the optimal number of children per node, namely k. Next, it started
                      tree construction from the BS. For each node on the tree, it chose its k closest nodes that are
                      not on the tree, as its children.
                            The problem of clustering and routing in homogenous WSNs has been studied in
                      various research including [30–34]. Authors in [31] presented an optimization approach for
                      CH selection in IoT-assisted WSNs. They used factors like energy, delay, and distance as
                      fitness criteria. Additionally, they employed tunicate swarm GWO algorithm for multipath
                      routing. Reference [33] proposed a fuzzy logic-based CH selection method, which used the
                      Mamdani inference engine to evaluate factors such as residual energy, node centrality, and
                      distance to the BS, mimicking human decision-making for optimal CH selection. In [35], the
                      authors introduced a hybrid Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) and Artificial Bee Colony
                      (ABC) algorithm to reduce routing costs. Shahid et al. [36] improved packet delivery and
                      energy efficiency by using proper links, where the criteria for link selection was the link
                      quality, energy of nodes, and distance between nodes. The quality of links was estimated
                      using exponential moving average.
                            References [4,5,12,14,37] studied clustering and routing in HWSNs. Shafique et al. [37]
                      considered energy heterogeneity and proposed a greedy algorithm for updating CHs of
                      static clusters. The criteria for CH selection were the energy level of node and the exhausted
                      energy by other sensors to send data to that node. To forward data of a CH toward the
                      BS, its closer neighbors to the BS were examined, and the node with highest residual
                      energy was adopted as the next-hop. Meta-heuristic algorithms have also been applied to
                      clustering and routing in HWSNs [4,5,10–12,14]. Reference [8] proposed a greedy algorithm
                      for clustering and applied Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) for routing. In [4], PSO was
                      used to assign super nodes as CHs and build a spanning tree. The criteria in PSO-based
                      clustering were network lifetime and distances between CMs and CHs, while average
                      energy of routes and distances between successive super nodes on routes were considered
                      for tree construction. Reference [10] also employed PSO for clustering and routing, focusing
                      on energy and reliability. Wang et al. [12] performed join clustering and tree construction
                      using bipartite chromosomes. The algorithm aimed to balance energy consumption of CHs
                      while reducing overall energy consumption. Additionally, an improved chaos logistic map
                      was applied to generate initial population to increase population diversity.
                            In [5], a two-phase GA handled clustering and tree construction for multi-channel
                      HWSNs with normal and super nodes. The multi-radio super nodes were designated as
                      CH, while the single-radio normal nodes were assigned to one of its neighboring CHs
                      and connected to it using one of its assigned channels. In the tree construction phase,
                      the algorithm balanced energy of super nodes based on their distances to the BS, which
                      improved network lifetime considerably. Additionally, it offered a novel criterion for even
                      distribution of normal nodes among CHs, further balancing the energy consumption of
                      super nodes. The proposed algorithm in [5] was extended in [11], where authors employed
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                                           5 of 28



                      GWO to optimize Transmission Power Control (TPC) in a HWSN with TPC-enabled super
                      nodes. Reference [14] presented a novel algorithm for efficient data gathering in HWSNs.
                      The approach consisted of two key phases: clustering and spanning tree construction. GA
                      was employed in both phases, utilizing a problem-specific chromosome representation, a
                      tailored population initialization scheme, and customized genetic operators (i.e., mutation
                      and crossover). Specifically, in the tree construction phase, chromosomes were structured
                      as trees, facilitating designing an effective initialization scheme and GA operations.
                            Table 1 summarizes the related works discussed in this study, highlighting their target
                      problems and approaches. Despite the advancements in sleep scheduling, clustering, and
                      tree construction for HWSNs, existing methods often suffer from key limitations. Our
                      proposed solution addresses these deficits through an integrated two-phase approach
                      that simultaneously optimizes sleep scheduling, clustering, and tree construction. The
                      proposed GAs for the phases includes customized initialization methods and operators,
                      and novel cost functions, yielding further energy efficiency and network lifetime. Rigorous
                      simulations confirm the robustness of our approach, demonstrating its superiority over
                      existing methods in key performance metrics.

                      Table 1. The characteristics of the related works (HT: Heterogenous, HM: Homogenous, S: Seep
                      scheduling, C: Clustering, R: Routing, G: Greedy, DL: Deep Learning, TPO: Taylor-Political optimizer,
                      ROA: Remora Optimization Algorithm, F: Fuzzy).




                              Reference              Problem       Approach
                                          Node
                                                                                                   Features
                                          Type


                       [4,10]             HT     C, R          PSO            •   Limited performance due to using standard PSO
                       [5]                HT     C, R          GA             •   Even energy consumption in the network
                                                                              •   Excessive energy consumption due to direct data
                       [6]                HT     C             GWO
                                                                                  transmission form CHs to the BS
                                                                              •   Limited performance due to proposing greedy
                                                               G,
                       [8]                HT     C, R                             method for clustering and standard ACO
                                                               ACO
                                                                                  for routing
                                                                              •   Limited performance due to proposing greedy
                       [9]                HT     C, R          G
                                                                                  methods for clustering and routing
                                                                              •   Optimizing transmission power and
                       [11]               HT     C, R          GWO
                                                                                  energy efficiency
                                                                              •   Complexity in chromosome design, yielding
                       [12]               HT     C, R          GA
                                                                                  lower performance
                                                                              •   High computational complexity
                       [13]               HT     S             G
                                                                              •   Limited scalability
                                                                              •   Problem-specific chromosome and operators
                       [14]               HT     C, R          GA                 improve performance
                                                                              •   Computationally intensive
                                                                              •   Customized to solar-powered WSNs, considering
                       [15]               HM     S             G
                                                                                  variations in energy harvesting rate
                                                                              •   Customized to solar-powered WSNs, considering
                       [16,17,20,22]      HM     S             RL                 variations in energy harvesting rate
                                                                              •   Training overhead
                                                                              •   Limited performance due to proposing greedy
                       [18]               HM     S, C          G
                                                                                  methods for sleep scheduling and clustering
                                                                              •   Limited performance due to proposing greedy
                                                 S, C,
                       [19]               HM                   G                  methods for sleep scheduling, clustering,
                                                 R
                                                                                  and routing
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                                          6 of 28



                      Table 1. Cont.




                              Reference              Problem       Approach
                                          Node
                                                                                                   Features
                                          Type


                                                 S, C,                        •   Assuming static CMs
                       [21]               HM                   RL
                                                 R                            •   Training overhead
                                                                              •   Limited performance due to proposing a greedy
                                                                                  method for clustering
                       [23]               HT     C             G
                                                                              •   Excessive energy consumption due to direct data
                                                                                  transmission form CHs to the BS
                                                                              •   Limited performance due to proposing a greedy
                                                                                  method for clustering
                       [24]               HM     C             G
                                                                              •   Excessive energy consumption due to direct data
                                                                                  transmission form CHs to the BS
                                                               DL,
                       [25]               HM     C, R                         •   Higher computational cost
                                                               BHH
                       [26]               HM     R             G              •   Assuming event-driven model
                                                               RL,
                       [27]               HM     R                            •   No clustering method
                                                               BES
                       [28]               HM     R             GWO            •   No clustering method
                                                                              •   Limited performance due to proposing a greedy
                       [29]               HM     R             G
                                                                                  method for routing
                                                                              •   Assuming static CMs
                       [30]               HM     C, R          RL, G
                                                                              •   Training overhead
                                                               TPO,
                       [31]               HM     C, R                         •   Higher computational cost
                                                               GWO
                                                                              •   Performing power control
                       [32]               HM     C, R          G              •   Limited performance due to proposing greedy
                                                                                  methods for clustering and routing
                                                                              •   Depending on proper rule design
                       [33]               HM     C             F              •   Excessive energy consumption due to direct data
                                                                                  transmission form CHs to the BS
                                                                              •   Excessive energy consumption due to direct data
                       [34]               HM     C             ROA
                                                                                  transmission form CHs to the BS
                                                               PSO,           •   No clustering method
                       [35]               HM     R
                                                               ABC            •   Complexity of the hybrid algorithm
                                                                              •   Limited performance due to proposing a greedy
                       [36]               HM     R             G                  method for routing
                                                                              •   Considering link quality
                                                                              •   Assuming static CMs
                       [37]               HT     C, R          G              •   Limited performance due to proposing greedy
                                                                                  methods for CH selection and routing


                      3. Network Model
                           In the assumed network model, there are two types of nodes: super nodes and normal
                      nodes. A sample HWSN is illustrated in Figure 1. We use S and N to show the set of super
                      nodes and normal sensors, respectively. Every node, either super node or normal sensor,
                      uses a battery with limited capacity. Super nodes possess greater initial energy and a larger
                      transmission range compared to normal nodes. The initial energy and transmission range
                      of super nodes are shown by eS and tr S , respectively. These parameters are presented by e N
                      and tr N for normal sensors. Additionally, there are fewer super nodes than normal sensors
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                              7 of 28



                      in the HWSN. The term ei refers to the remaining energy of the ith node, which can be a
                      super node or a normal sensor. Finally, |.| shows the cardinality of an assumed set.




                      Figure 1. A sample HWSN. Super nodes are represented by octagons, where gray octagons denote
                      sleeping super nodes and green octagons indicate awake ones. Additionally, normal nodes are shown
                      by circles.

                            Normal nodes are tasked with environmental monitoring. They collect data and send
                      it to a nearby super node, which serves as their CH. The potential CHs for a normal node
                      ni are super nodes within its transmission range. Each super node aggregates data of
                      its assigned CMs. Since the BS might not be directly reachable by all super nodes, data
                      needs to be relayed. For a super node si , other super nodes closer to the BS and within
                      its transmission range are considered as its potential parents. One of these super nodes is
                      selected as the parent for forwarding the data.
                            The network employs Time Division Multiple Access (TDMA) at the Medium Access
                      Control (MAC) layer, which divides channel into timeslots. The data exchange process
                      includes intra-cluster communication, where normal nodes transmit their collected data to
                      their designated CHs during allocated timeslots, and inter-cluster communication, where
                      super nodes use multi-hop forwarding to relay the gathered data toward the BS during
                      their assigned timeslots.
                            The proposed energy model in [38] is used to compute required energy for data
                      transmission/reception. The model proposes (1) and (2) for calculating consumed energy
                      needed for transmission (etrs ) and reception (erec ) based on packet size (l), respectively.
                      These formulas incorporate factors like internal circuit energy (eelec ) and signal amplification
                      energy. The amplification model varies with distance: the free space model for shorter
                      distances, and the multipath fading model for distances beyond the threshold d0 . Amplifier
                      energy consumption is denoted by ε f s and ε mp for these models, respectively.
                                                                   (
                                                                        l eelec + l ε f s d2tr , dtr < d0
                                                etrs (l, dtr ) =                                                    (1)
                                                                       l eelec + l ε mp d4tr , dtr ≥ d0

                                                                   erec (l ) = l eelec                              (2)
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                         8 of 28



                           In our study, path loss effects related to carrier frequency are not considered, as the
                      focus is on evaluating the algorithmic performance under uniform propagation conditions.
                      All studies used for comparison also follow the same assumption. It is worth mentioning
                      our algorithm is fully applicable to environments with path loss.
                           The defined network model serves as the foundation for the proposed GA-based
                      framework, where the relationships among nodes, their energy consumption, and commu-
                      nication structure guide the optimization of sleep scheduling, clustering, and routing. In
                      the next section, we formulate these relationships into an optimization problem and detail
                      how the GA is designed to solve it efficiently.

                      4. The Proposed Method
                            Figure 2 illustrates the workflow cycle during network lifetime. The network lifetime
                      is divided into multiple rounds, each consisting of several time slices. During each time
                      slice, data collected by normal nodes is first transmitted to super nodes via intra-cluster
                      communication. Subsequently, super nodes relay this data to the BS through inter-cluster
                      communication. The proposed algorithm is executed at the start of each round, where the
                      BS gathers network information, such as the remaining energy of the nodes, to configure
                      the network for optimal performance. This configuration is then applied throughout the
                      time slices of the round. At the end of each round, the BS re-runs the algorithm to adjust
                      for any changes in node characteristics, ensuring continuous network operation.




                      Figure 2. Workflow cycle during network lifetime.
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                            9 of 28



                           Our algorithm enhances data collection in HWSNs through integrating sleep schedul-
                      ing, clustering, and routing. Considering the wide solution space of the mentioned prob-
                      lems, we divide the process into two phases to reduce complexity. Additionally, we employ
                      a GA to obtain efficient solutions for each phase within a reasonable time. In the first phase,
                      GA is used to solve the problem of selecting awake nodes and constructing a communica-
                      tion tree. The second phase focuses on network clustering. The specific steps involved in
                      each phase are detailed in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, respectively.

                      4.1. Sleep Scheduling and Tree Construction
                            In WSNs, efficient energy management is crucial for prolonging the network lifetime,
                      particularly in heterogeneous environments where nodes have varying capabilities. Sleep
                      scheduling plays a pivotal role in conserving energy by allowing nodes to enter the sleep
                      mode when not actively transmitting or receiving data. This approach extends the lifetime
                      of nodes, ensuring that critical tasks such as data transmission and routing are handled
                      thoroughly. Simultaneously, during tree construction, it should be ensured that the network
                      avoids overloading certain nodes, preventing premature depletion of their energy resources.
                      The process of tree construction is intrinsically linked to the sleep scheduling, because
                      the awake nodes form the backbone for data gathering within the network. Therefore,
                      the combined approach of optimal sleep scheduling and tree construction is essential for
                      maintaining a balanced load distribution, enhancing the overall efficiency, and extending
                      the longevity of the HWSN. Accordingly, we propose an innovative approach that combines
                      sleep scheduling and tree construction into a single-step process. This unified model,
                      optimized using a GA, is designed to efficiently find the best solution within a reasonable
                      time. The following sections will detail the chromosome representation, initial population
                      construction, cost function, and GA operators proposed in our approach.

                      4.1.1. Chromosome Representation
                           The proposed GA aims to simultaneously address the dual issues of sleep scheduling
                      and tree construction in HWSNs. To achieve this, we design a chromosome structure repre-
                      sented as a matrix with dimensions of 2×|S|. Each column within this matrix corresponds
                      to a specific super node in the network. The first row of the matrix corresponds to sleep
                      state of super nodes, while the second row is dedicated to the tree construction problem.
                      The values in the first row are binary: zero indicates that a super node is in the sleep state,
                      and one indicates that it is awake. Additionally, the second row presents the selected
                      parents for super nodes. In a chromosome, the super nodes are arranged sequentially based
                      on their distance to the BS. Thus, the super node closest to the BS occupies the first column,
                      while the one farthest away is positioned in the last column. Figure 3 shows an example
                      chromosome and its representative tree. In the figure, green octagons represent awake
                      super nodes, while gray octagons represent those in sleep mode. The lines between awake
                      super nodes indicate links of the constructed tree.
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                          10 of 28




                      (a)                                                                        (b)

                      Figure 3. A sample chromosome and its representative awake nodes and tree: (a) the chromosome
                      and (b) the resultant network configuration according to the chromosome.

                      4.1.2. Population Initialization
                            The elements of the proposed chromosome structure are populated according to the
                      following scheme. A critical consideration to construct a chromosome is to select proper
                      awake nodes, ensuring they are evenly distributed across the network. This distribution is
                      essential for having at-least one super node within proximity to each normal node, allowing
                      it to serve as the CH for gathering and forwarding data to the BS.
                            We divide the network into concentric rings centered around the BS and wake up ar
                      super nodes per ring (Figure 4). This unequal clustering idea was previously comprehen-
                      sively discussed in [39] and proved to be a good solution to hot-spot problem. Determining
                      the optimal number of rings is a complex process, refined through trial and error. Rings
                      that are too narrow may limit the selection of suitable nodes, while excessively large
                      rings could lead to suboptimal configurations. Furthermore, the value of ar is determined
                      based on different parameters such as the number of normal nodes and density of super
                      nodes. The selection of awake nodes within each ring is carried out randomly, based
                      on a weighted probability that considers remaining energy of super nodes. Equation (3)
                      calculates pr awake (si ), the probability of selecting si to serve as an awake node. In this
                      equation, R(si ) shows the ring which si belongs to.

                                                                                  ei
                                                         prawake (si )=                                          (3)
                                                                          ∑ s k ∈ R ( si ) e k

                           Since the tree construction relies on awake nodes, columns corresponding to super
                      nodes that are in the sleep state do not process. However, for super nodes that are awake
                      (with a value of one), a subsequent step is required to construct the tree. This step involves
                      selecting a random neighbor for each awake super node si , which must be both awake
                      and positioned closer to the BS than si , to form the tree structure. If none of the neighbors
                      of si is awake, the chromosome is discarded. The selection of the parent among the
                      super nodes which fulfill these constraints is influenced by their remaining energy, as
                      shown in (4). According to this equation, super nodes with higher remaining energy
                      have a greater probability of being selected as the parent, thereby ensuring that the tree
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                                                   11 of 28



                      construction process favors nodes with sufficient energy reserves. This approach not only
                      helps in balancing the energy consumption across the network but also enhances the overall
                      robustness and longevity of the HWSN.




                      Figure 4. The illustrated network in Figure 3 with rings.

                                                                                            ej
                                         prparent s j =                                                                           ,       (4)
                                                          ∑ s k ∈ N ( si )   V
                                                                                 dist(sk ,BS)<dist(si ,BS)
                                                                                                             V
                                                                                                                 si is awake ek

                      where N (si ) is the set of neighbor super nodes of si , and dist is the distance function.

                      4.1.3. Cost Function
                           GA uses a cost function to evaluate the acceptability of a particular solution (or
                      chromosome). This function assigns a numerical value to each solution that reflects its
                      quality or fitness. Our objective is to investigate two key factors: (1) the quality of the
                      selection of awake nodes and (2) the quality of the constructed tree.
                           To evaluate the first factor, we examine the number of normal nodes that lack an
                      awake super node in their neighborhood, as defined by (5). In this equation, X jT stands for
                      the jth chromosome. Additionally, ON shows the set of orphan normal nodes that there is
                      not an awake super node in their vicinity. The smaller value of f actor1 indicates choosing
                      better awake nodes, as it designates that the selected awake nodes are distributed evenly in
                      the network, ensuring each normal node has at-least one awake super node nearby. The
                      division by the total number of awake nodes is intended to normalize this metric, making
                      it comparable with other factors.
                                                                              |ON |
                                                                f actor1 X jT =                                                           (5)
                                                                                 |N|

                           The coverage criterion related to the sleep scheduling problem. The proposed sleep
                      scheduling algorithm for HWSNs in [13] preserved connectivity between the awake nodes
                      and did not take into account the coverage measure. Other sleep scheduling algorithms
                      considered homogenous WSNs and considered the connectivity of awake nodes and cover-
                      age of the monitoring area. It should be noted that our algorithm preserved connectivity
                      through applying the proposed repair method in Section 4.1.4 to the outcome of crossover
                      and mutation operators.
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                            12 of 28



                           Another factor for evaluating the chromosomes is the quality of the constructed tree.
                      To assess this, we aim to increase the minimum remaining energy of the nodes, as described
                      in (6). In this equation, er ji demonstrates the remaining energy of super node si at the
                      end of the round assuming the proposed network configuration by X jT . This approach
                      ensures that tree structures which route data through nodes with higher energy levels are
                      considered more suitable.
                                                                      minsk ∈S er jk
                                                        f actor2 X jT =                                       (6)
                                                                             es
                           There are various energy-related criteria for data collection in WSNs. The most
                      common metrics are energy consumption and network lifetime [4,5,10]. The proposed
                      factor in (6) includes both of these metrics. It prioritizes configurations with lower energy
                      usage. Additionally, it prolongs network lifetime by increasing the remaining energy of
                      nodes at the end of the round.
                           Finally, our cost function is defined by (7), and our objective is to minimize it.
                                                                            
                                cost1 X jT = w1 × f actor1 X jT − w2 × f actor2 X jT ,          w1 + w2 = 1        (7)

                      4.1.4. GA Operators
                           The key components of GA, including selection, crossover, and mutation operators,
                      are introduced in this section. We customize each of these operators to suit the specific
                      problem at hand and to align with the proposed chromosome structure model, which we
                      will detail in the following.
                           Selection: The selection operator in GA is responsible for choosing which individuals
                      from the current population will contribute to the creation of the next generation. The
                      idea is to select the fittest individuals, those that are better suited to the problem according
                      to the fitness function, to pass on their genes to their offspring. We employ Roulette
                      Wheel Selection (RWS) as our selection operator, detailed in (8). In this equation, the term
                      pop T refers to the population of chromosomes. In the RWS method, the chance of each
                      chromosome to being selected as a parent is proportional to its cost. The lower the cost
                      value, the higher the probability of selection, and conversely, chromosomes with higher
                      cost values have a reduced chance of selection. This approach increases the likelihood that
                      superior chromosomes, which demonstrate more effective network structures, will produce
                      the next generation. However, we do not completely eliminate the possibility of selecting
                      weaker chromosomes. They are still given a chance to contribute as parents, with the hope
                      that some aspects of their structure might offer a valuable solution to the problem.
                                                                                
                                                                      1/cost1 X jT
                                                  RWS X jT =                                                       (8)
                                                                 ∑ X T ∈ popT 1/cost1 XkT
                                                                                            
                                                                    k


                           Crossover: The crossover operator in GA is responsible for combining the genetic
                      information of two parent chromosomes to produce offspring. This process mimics bio-
                      logical reproduction and aims to create new solutions (chromosomes) that inherit features
                      from both parents, potentially leading to better solutions. In this phase, we employ the
                      single-point crossover operator. Accordingly, a point is selected on two chromosomes, and
                      the genes on the left side of one chromosome are combined with the genes on the right side
                      of the other chromosome, and vice versa, resulting in two new offspring.
                           It is crucial to note that this crossover operation may not always yield valid chromo-
                      somes. The first issue is that a node may have no awake parent toward the BS. The other
                      concern is that the number of awake nodes may deviate from the desired quantity. To
                      address these issues, a repair procedure is proposed. The method ensures that the number
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                                                 13 of 28



                      of awake nodes in each ring is equal to ar. Accordingly, the number of awake nodes in
                      each ring is examined: if it matches ar, no action is required. If there are more awake
                      nodes than desired, we probabilistically reduce their number by switching some of them
                      to the sleep state, based on their remaining energy levels (Equation (9)). Conversely, if
                      there are fewer awake nodes than necessary, additional sleeping nodes are selected, once
                      again probabilistically, based on their remaining energy according to (10), and switched
                      to the awake state. Once the number of awake nodes has been adjusted, we proceed to
                      validate the offspring. For nodes whose have at least one potential parent in the resultant
                      offspring, no change is required. Otherwise, one of the closer super nodes to the BS is
                      activated probabilistically considering their remaining energy, as shown in (11).

                                                                                               ei
                                                      prremove (si )=                                                                   (9)
                                                                                ∑sk ∈ R(si )∧sk is awake ek

                                                                                             ei
                                                       pradd (si )=                                                                    (10)
                                                                               ∑sk ∈ R(si )∧sk is sleep ek
                                                                                              ej
                                           prparent s j =                                                                              (11)
                                                            ∑ s k ∈ N ( si )   V
                                                                                   dist(sk ,BS)<dist(si ,BS)
                                                                                                               V
                                                                                                                   si is sleep ek

                            The pseudocode of the proposed crossover operator is presented in Algorithm 1. In
                      this algorithm, R presents the set of rings, and nar is the number of awake nodes in ring r.
                      Additionally, PPi is the set of potential parents of super node si .

                       Algorithm 1. Crossover operator of the first phase
                       Input: XiT , X jT
                                T , OT
                       Output: O1ij  2ij
                       Steps:
                       1.     T , O T ← Apply crossover operator to X T and X T .
                             O1ij   2ij               n          o i          j
                       2.                         T      T    T
                             For each chromosome Xk ∈ O1ij , O2ij do
                       3.    For each ring r ∈ R do
                       4.    If nar < ar do
                       5.          Awake ar − nar sleeping nodes consecutively, where the probability of awaking a node
                             is computed using (9).
                       6.    If ar < nar do
                       7.          Put to sleep nar − ar awake nodes consecutively, where the probability of putting to
                             sleep a node is computed using (10).
                       8.    End
                       9.    For each sm ∈ S do
                                                               
                              PPm ← s p ∈ N (sm ) dist s p , BS < dist(sm , BS) .
                                                    V
                       10.
                       11.   If all nodes of PPm are in sleep mode do
                       12.   Awake a node in PPm , where the probability of awaking a node is computed using (11).
                       13.   End
                       14.   End

                           Figure 5 demonstrates an example of the proposed crossover operator. In this fig-
                      ure, the single-point crossover is applied to parent chromosomes, which are shown in
                      Figure 5a,b, to produce two offspring. Here, s4 is selected as the crossover point. We
                      demonstrate one of the offsprings in Figure 5c. After generation of the offspring, we check
                      for the validity of chromosome and change the structure of the chromosome to produce a
                      valid chromosome (Figure 5d).
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                                   14 of 28




                      (a)                                                                 (b)




                      (c)                                                                 (d)

                       Figure 5. Crossover operation for sleep scheduling and tree construction: (a) the first parent; (b) the
                       second parent; (c) the first offspring before repairment; and (d) the ultimate first offspring.

                             Mutation: The mutation operator in GA introduces random changes to the genes of a
                       chromosome to maintain genetic diversity within the population. This operator is crucial
                       because, without it, GA might converge too quickly to a suboptimal solution, getting stuck
                       in local optima. According to the chromosome structure, we propose a customized mutation
                       operator. In this approach, the number of genes of adopted chromosomes undergoing
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                                         15 of 28



                      mutation is higher in the initial iterations of the algorithm and gradually decreases as the
                      algorithm progresses. The number of genes undergoing mutation at iteration t, m(t), is
                      calculated as                                              
                                                                               t
                                                        m(t) = mmax 1 −             .                         (12)
                                                                             tmax
                      where mmax and tmax are the initial number of genes undergoing mutation and the total
                      number of iterations, respectively. This strategy enables extensive exploration of the
                      solution space in the early iterations and shifts towards exploitation in the later ones.
                           The corresponding super nodes to the adopted genes are investigated, and the awake
                      ones are switched from the awake to the sleep state. For each of these asleep super nodes,
                      a node in the same ring must be woken up. This activation is controlled by the given
                      probabilistic function in (10).
                           The pseudocode of the proposed mutation operator is presented in Algorithm 2.

                       Algorithm 2. Mutation operator of the first phase
                       Input: XiT
                       Output: MiT
                       Steps:
                       1         MiT ← XiT .
                       2         For m(t) times do
                       3         s j ← Select a random awake super node.
                       4         Put to sleep s j , and awake a sleeping node sk ∈ R, which is selected probabilistically
                                 using (10).
                       5         End


                           Figure 6 demonstrates an example of the mutation operator. In this figure, based
                      on the mutation operator, s8 goes to sleep mode. Accordingly, one other super node, for
                      example s7 , is woken up in the ring and a parent is selected for this node from the awake
                      super nodes.




                           (a)                                                           (b)

                      Figure 6. Mutation operation for sleep scheduling and tree consrtruction: (a) the adopted chromosome
                      before mutation and (b) the mutated chromosome.
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                             16 of 28



                      4.2. Clustering
                           After completing the first phase, which involves introducing awake nodes in the
                      network and constructing a tree on them, we proceed to the second phase, in which each
                      normal node selects an awake super node in their neighborhood to act as their CH. To
                      achieve this aim, we employ a GA, the details of which are outlined in the following.

                      4.2.1. Chromosome Representation and Population Initialization
                            The proposed chromosome structure for network clustering consists of an array of
                      length | N |. Each gene of this chromosome corresponds to a normal node of the HWSN. To
                      ensure a consistent structure across all chromosomes, the normal nodes in each chromosome
                      are sorted based on their distance to the BS. Each gene presents the randomly selected
                      CH for each corresponding normal node, which is selected from the awake super nodes
                      within its transmission range. Figure 7 illustrates an example clustering chromosome and
                      its corresponding network structure.




                                                    (a)




                                                    (b)

                      Figure 7. A sample chromosome and its resultant clustering scheme: (a) the chromosome and (b) the
                      resultant clusters.

                      4.2.2. Cost Function
                            A cost function is proposed to assess the quality of clustering chromosomes. In this
                      context, we consider two key criteria: The first metric promotes even clustering by ensuring
                      an equal number of CMs for each CH, and the second one aims to maximize the minimum
                      energy of CHs. The former helps evenly distribute the load of the network, while the
                      latter accounts for the energy levels of the CHs to prevent any super node from depleting
                      prematurely. Equation (13) describes the first measure, where AS represents the set of
                      awake super nodes selected in the previous phase, and nm ji indicates the number of
                      cluster members assigned to the super node si according to clustering chromosome X jC .
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                                   17 of 28



                                Additionally, inm represents the ideal number of cluster members and is calculated by
                                dividing the number of available normal nodes by the number of awake super nodes:
                                                                                     nm ji
                                                                 f actor3 X jC = std         .                           (13)
                                                                                si ∈AS inm

                                    Equation (14) describes f actor4 , which is similar to f actor2 in the tree construction
                                phase. The difference is that f actor2 relies solely on the structure of the proposed tree,
                                without knowledge of the number of CMs for each super node. On the other hand, f actor4
                                accounts for the exact number of CMs per super node in the clustering phase, enabling
                                more precise calculation of er ji :

                                                                             minsk ∈S er jk
                                                               f actor4 X jC =                .                          (14)
                                                                                    es

                                     Finally, the energy level of normal nodes is balanced as described in (15):
                                                                             minnk ∈ N er jk
                                                               f actor5 X jC =                 .                         (15)
                                                                                   eN

                                    Our cost function is defined by (16), and our objective is to minimize this function:
                                                                           
           cost2 X jC = w3 × f actor3 X jC − w4 × f actor4 X jC + w5 × f actor5 X jC ,          w3 + w4 + w5 = 1.      (16)

                                4.2.3. GA Operators
                                     Our GA uses three core operators to iteratively refine the population and guide
                                it towards high-quality solutions including selection, crossover, and mutation. These
                                operators are explored in the following.
                                     Selection: We use RWS as the selection operator, which selects chromosomes based
                                on the value returned by the cost function using a similar probability function to (8).
                                Chromosomes with lower costs (indicating better solutions) have a higher probability of
                                being chosen to produce the next generation.
                                     Crossover: The crossover operator is employed to explore the solution space. In this
                                case, a single-point crossover is used. All offspring produced by this operator are valid
                                solutions for the clustering problem.
                                     Mutation: In the proposed mutation process, for a random chromosome, a number of
                                genes—which are corresponded to CHs of normal nodes—are randomly selected. The CH
                                of each chosen normal node is changed from its current CH to another awake super node
                                within its transmission range.

                                5. Experimental Results and Discussion
                                      In this section, we evaluate the performance of the proposed method and compare it
                                with HEDHMG (High-throughput and Energy-efficient Data gathering in Heterogeneous
                                Multi-channel WSNs using GA) [5], EFCRPSO (Energy eFficient Clustering and Routing
                                algorithms for WSNs using PSO) [10], EFEBPSO (Energy-eFficient and Energy-Balanced
                                routing and clustering in WSNs using PSO) [4], and CRCGA (Clustering Routing protocol
                                using a Chaotic Genetic Algorithm) [12]. The reason for selecting the mentioned methods
                                is that they are addressing similar clustering, routing, and energy optimization problems in
                                HWSNs. HEDHMG used a two-phase GA for clustering and tree construction. CRCGA
                                employed GA to solve the joint problem of clustering and tree construction, using a bipartite
                                chromosome representation and chaos-based initialization. EFEBPSO and EFCRPSO were
                                applied PSO to construct the tree and clusters in two consecutive phases. The mentioned
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                              18 of 28



                      algorithms adopted different energy-related criteria to preserve energy efficiency such as
                      the amount of consumed energy and lifetime of nodes.
                             The performance metrics used for comparison include area coverage, total energy
                      consumption, First Node Die (FND), Last Node Die (LND), and number of available super
                      nodes. The algorithms are implemented using WSNSimPy, a Python 3 library for discrete
                      event simulation of WSNs. We evaluate three different networks, WSN 1 , WSN 2 , and
                      WSN 3 which differ in node density and network dimensions. The network WSN 1 consists
                      of 60 super nodes and 200 normal nodes, with the BS positioned in the lower-left corner of
                      the area. The network WSN 2 is denser, featuring 80 super nodes and 250 normal nodes,
                      and also has the BS located in the corner, similar to WSN 1 . Both WSN 1 and WSN 2 are
                      networks with dimensions of 200 m × 200 m. To evaluate the performance of the proposed
                      method on the large networks, we use another network with dimensions of 300 m × 300 m
                      which is named as WSN 3 . This network consists of 120 super nodes and 500 normal nodes.
                             Table 2 outlines the parameters used in the simulations. The parameters of the energy
                      model, including eelec , e f s , emp , and d0 , are taken from [38]. Additionally, parameters e N ,
                      eS , tr N , and tr S , are adopted from HEDHMG [5] to ensure consistency and fairness in
                      performance comparison. In this table, we set the number of rings to four and the number
                      of awake super nodes to 50% of all super nodes. These values are determined through pre-
                      liminary simulations in which different configurations were tested. The results showed that
                      dividing the network into four rings provides the best performance. Increasing the number
                      of rings makes the rings too narrow, reducing the pool of suitable nodes. Conversely,
                      decreasing the number of rings yields rings that are too large, resulting in suboptimal con-
                      figurations. Similarly, keeping 50% of the super nodes awake ensures an optimal balance
                      between network connectivity and energy consumption, as higher percentages lead to
                      unnecessary energy drain while lower ones increase the risk of connectivity loss.

                      Table 2. Simulation parameters.

                                 Parameter                          Value                          Reference
                                                               200 m × 200 m,
                            Network dimensions
                                                               300 m × 300 m
                                     eN                                2J                              [5]
                                      eS                              10 J                             [5]
                                    tr N                             30 m                              [5]
                                     tr S                            90 m                              [5]
                                    eelec                         50 nJ/bit                           [38]
                                     efs                        10 pJ/bit/m2                          [38]
                                    emp                       0.0013           4                      [38]
                                                                  q pJ/bit/m
                                     d0                             e f s /emp                        [38]
                           Time slices per round                       50                             [5]
                             Number of rings                           4
                                     ar                   50% of all the super nodes


                            Table 3 provides the GA parameters for the proposed method, including the weights
                      for the criteria used in the cost functions, the number of iterations, and the population size.
                      The weights in the proposed cost functions are determined based on preliminary exper-
                      iments to balance the impact of different factors such as energy consumption, coverage,
                      and connectivity. These experiments evaluate how varying each weight affects overall
                      network performance, allowing us to select values that provide a reasonable trade-off
                      among competing objectives.
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                             19 of 28



                      Table 3. GA parameters.

                                        Parameter                                        Value
                                     Population size                                      30
                                   Number of iterations                                   50
                                          w1                                              0.5
                                          w2                                              0.5
                                          w3                                              0.3
                                          w4                                              0.4
                                          w5                                              0.3


                      5.1. Normal Node Coverage
                            This metric quantifies the number of normal nodes that have a super node as their CH.
                      It serves as an indicator of how effectively the first phase of the algorithm selects awake
                      super nodes. In this way, the algorithm can ensure super nodes are evenly spread across
                      the network which increases the likelihood that normal nodes have an accessible awake
                      super node nearby. Effective network coverage is critical for achieving performance and
                      efficiency goals.
                            Figure 8 illustrates area coverage for WSN1 , WSN2 and WSN3 , using the proposed
                      method. In the early rounds, WSN 2 achieves almost full coverage, primarily because it
                      contains a greater density of super nodes compared to WSN1 and WSN3 . This higher super
                      node density facilitates finding an awake super node in the neighborhood of normal nodes,
                      supporting a strong coverage. Conversely, WSN 1 , and WSN3 , which have fewer super
                      nodes density, display slightly lower coverage, as the reduced number of super nodes
                      limits the availability of CHs across the network. As time progresses, coverage decreases in
                      all networks due to the depletion of super nodes. The decrease in the network coverage
                      over time can be attributed to the energy consumption and eventual failure of super nodes,
                      which reduces the ability of the HWSN to maintain consistent communication routes.
                      However, even with this gradual reduction, the area coverage remains within acceptable
                      thresholds in all of the networks.




                      Figure 8. Normal node coverage of the proposed algorithm using WSN1 , WSN2 , and WSN3 .

                           Figure 9 illustrates a comparison of normal node coverage between the proposed
                      algorithm and other considered approaches. As depicted in the figure, the proposed algo-
                      rithm significantly outperforms HEDHMG, EFCRPSO, EFEBPSO, and CRCGA in all of
                      the networks. Specifically, in WSN 1 , the proposed algorithm achieves an average cover-
                      age improvement of 8.6%, 29%, 31.1%, and 51.1% over HEDHMG, EFCRPSO, EFEBPSO,
                      and CRCGA, respectively. Similarly, in WSN 2 , the proposed algorithm surpasses these
                      algorithms by 5.6%, 14.5%, 27.4%, and 33.4%, respectively. The average normal node
                      coverage improvements in WSN3 are 9%, 36%, 41%, and 61% regarding the competitive
                      methods, respectively.
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                              20 of 28




                      (a)                                                              (b)




                                                      (c)

                       Figure 9. Normal node coverage comparison: (a) WSN 1 ; (b) WSN 2 ; (c) WSN 3 .

                            To better contextualize the results, Table 4 summarizes the expected, minimum, and
                       maximum normal node coverage values. In general, prior research indicates that coverage
                       in HWSNs ranges from approximately 32% to 99%, depending on super node density
                       and network topology. Our proposed algorithm achieves coverage within or above these
                       ranges for all networks. Specifically, WSN 1 achieves coverage between 76% and 94% over
                       the simulation rounds, while WSN 2 , with higher super node density, maintains coverage
                       between 86% and near-full coverage. The coverage for WSN 3 are 70% to 89%. These results
                       confirm that the algorithm effectively balances sleep scheduling and CH selection, leading
                       to sustained high coverage compared to HEDHMG, EFCRPSO, EFEBPSO, and CRCGA.

                       Table 4. Summary of resultant normal node coverage.

                                                Proposed Algorithm                      Competitive Algorithms
                            Network
                                         Min           Max         Expected         Min           Max      Expected
                            WSN 1         76%           94%           85%           36%           94%        65%
                            WSN 2         86%          100%           93%           50%           99%       74.5%
                            WSN 3         70%           89%          79.5%          32%           88%        60%


                            This sustained coverage is largely due to the inclusion of f actor1 in the algorithm,
                       which optimizes the sleep scheduling of super nodes. Using this factor ensures that super
                       nodes are cyclically activated, balancing their load to delay their energy depletion. By mini-
                       mizing the extent of orphan nodes through effective sleep scheduling, this factor enhances
                       network coverage and functionality. Consequently, despite the inevitable death of super
                       nodes, the proposed method ensures that the network retains satisfactory coverage levels
                       over time, supporting continued data collection in the HWSN. The other factor enhancing
                       our algorithm is proposing customized initialization, and crossover and mutation operators.
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                           21 of 28



                      According to these schemes, the HWSNs are divided into ring of equal width, and it is tried
                      to keep the number of awake super nodes in different rings the same. Therefore, the awake
                      nodes distribute evenly throughout the network.

                       5.2. Total Consumed Energy
                           The next metric under consideration is the total consumed energy, which calculates the
                      cumulative energy usage of super nodes that handle the primary task of data transmission
                      and delivery within the network. Each awake super node in the routing tree receives data
                      from its child nodes and forwards the gathered data along with the data of its own cluster
                      toward the BS through its parent. The amount of energy consumed by the node for data
                      reception and forwarding is calculated using (2) and (1), respectively. The total consumed
                      energy metric is essential for evaluating the efficiency of the network, as nodes have limited,
                      non-rechargeable energy sources, and conserving this energy directly influences network
                      longevity. Figure 10 compares total energy consumption of the proposed method with other
                      algorithms in WSN 1 , WSN 2 , and WSN 3 . In this figure, to assess the impact of variations
                      in the weight setup on the performance of the proposed algorithm, a new configuration,
                      where w1 , w2 , w3 , w4 , and w5 are set to 0.65, 0.35, 0.25, 0.5, and 0.25, is examined. This
                      configuration is named Conf 2, while the primary configuration that assumes the given
                      values in Table 3 is called Conf 1.




                      (a)                                                               (b)




                                                       (c)

                       Figure 10. Total energy consumption comparison: (a) WSN 1 ; (b) WSN 2 ; (c) WSN 3 .

                           In all networks, the proposed method outperforms competing algorithms in terms of
                      energy exhaustion. Specifically, for WSN 1 , it reduces energy consumption by 10.5%, 14%,
                      16.4%, and 18.7% when compared to the HEDHMG, EFCRPSO, EFEBPSO, and CRCGA
                      algorithms, respectively. These values are equal to 10.7%, 16.9%, 20.7%, and 21%, for WSN 2 ,
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                            22 of 28



                      and 11.5%, 15.5%, 17.7%, and 20%, for WSN 3 . Additionally, as shown in the figure, Conf 1
                      yields lower energy consumption compared to Conf 2.
                            The enhanced energy efficiency of our proposed approach in the considered network
                      types highlights the robustness of the proposed method under varying conditions. This
                      superiority is achieved due to the integration of four critical factors that we apply within
                      the tree construction and clustering phases. The first factor, f actor1 , ensures that awake
                      super nodes are distributed uniformly across the network, which is particularly important
                      for the tree construction phase. By spreading awake super nodes evenly, f actor1 enables the
                      formation of balanced communication routes. Without such uniform distribution, awake
                      super nodes could become concentrated in some areas, leaving other sections without
                      adequate awake super node coverage. This imbalance would limit the routing options
                      in those uncovered areas, leading to increased energy consumption as nodes are forced
                      to transmit data to distant parents. Furthermore, f actor2 prioritizes routes with higher
                      remaining energy in the tree construction phase, helping balance energy consumption
                      across the WSN. Finally, proposing customized initialization method and GA operators
                      enhances the performance of the proposed algorithm and reduces energy consumption.
                            In the clustering phase, additional efficiency is achieved through f actor3 and f actor4 .
                      The third factor plays a critical role by distributing normal nodes among super nodes as
                      evenly as possible. This distribution balances the load across all super nodes, reducing
                      the likelihood of any single node being overwhelmed by a large number of connections.
                      Such even distribution not only conserves the energy of individual super nodes but also
                      enhances the overall energy efficiency of the network. By preventing excessive energy
                      consumption in specific nodes, f actor3 contributes to a more sustainable energy usage
                      scheme throughout the network. Additionally, f actor4 focuses on energy conservation
                      of super nodes. This metric prevents premature exhaustion of any single super node
                      by distributing node responsibilities based on energy levels, similar to the prioritization
                      strategy in the tree construction phase. Finally, f actor5 reduces energy consumption of
                      normal nodes and prevents choosing far super nodes as CHs, which require high energy
                      levels for data transmission.
                            The employed factors in the cost functions create an energy management strategy that
                      optimizes the selection of awake super nodes. This approach not only conserves energy in
                      individual nodes but also maximizes overall network efficiency and ensures that HWSNs
                      maintain robust coverage and functionality over lengthy periods. Using customized
                      initialization, crossover, and mutation in the tree construction phase also improves energy
                      efficiency. Even distribution of awake super nodes avoids long distances between normal
                      nodes and their CHs, reducing exhausted energy for intra-cluster communication.

                      5.3. Network Lifetime
                           The network lifetime is measured as the time slice of occurring first death and last
                      death in the network. In the literature, the mentioned metrics are named as First Node Die
                      (FND) and Last Node Die (LND). Figure 11 compares the obtained FDN and LND of super
                      nodes by the competitive algorithms. As the figure illustrates, in our algorithm, both FND
                      and LND occur significantly later compared to competitive algorithms. Specifically, using
                      the proposed method in WSN1 results in improvement of 56, 167, 293, and 402 rounds
                      or FND compared to HEDHMG, EFCRPSO, EFEBPSO, and CRCGA, respectively. For
                      LND in WSN 1 , the improvements are 140, 620, 615, and 810 rounds regarding the same
                      algorithms. In WSN 2 , the proposed method yields FND improvements of 161, 311, 487,
                      and 532 rounds, and LND improvements of 128, 508, 681, and 757 rounds compared
                      to HEDHMG, EFCRPSO, EFEBPSO, and CRCGA, respectively. Finally, in WSN 3 , the
                      proposed method yields FND improvements of 23, 122 161, and 175 rounds, and LND im-
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                             23 of 28



                       provements of 150, 480, 570, and 560 rounds compared to HEDHMG, EFCRPSO, EFEBPSO,
                       and CRCGA, respectively.




                      (a)                                                            (b)

                       Figure 11. Network lifetime comparison: (a) FDN; (b) LDN.

                            The enhancements in these results can be attributed to effective sleep scheduling and
                       robust tree construction in the first phase, and efficient clustering in the latter phase. To be
                       more precise, f actor1 plays a crucial role in ensuring a uniform distribution of awake super
                       nodes across the network, which yields load-balanced trees and reduces the likelihood of
                       energy depletion in concentrated areas. The second factor, f actor2 , operating in the tree
                       construction phase, focuses on maximizing the minimum remaining energy of super nodes
                       within the tree. This factor gives priority to choosing super nodes with higher energy
                       reserves, helping avoid overusing specific nodes and thus balancing energy consumption
                       across the network. By distributing energy usage among super nodes more evenly, f actor2
                       helps extend the lifetime of each node and mitigates the risk of network segmentation due
                       to energy depletion in specific regions. Additionally, the proposed initialization method
                       and GA operators balance the number of awake super nodes in the rings, yielding more
                       even energy exhaustion and longer network lifetime.
                            In the clustering phase, f actor3 and f actor4 aid in evenly distributing normal nodes
                       among awake super nodes, further contributing to energy efficiency by preventing any
                       single super node from becoming overloaded. Together, these factors significantly extend
                       the operational lifetime of nodes within the network, leading to delayed FND and LND.
                       Furthermore, f actor5 balances energy consumption of normal nodes and prevents their
                       early death.

                       5.4. Number of Available Super Nodes
                            We define available super nodes as those that are alive and have other super nodes in
                       their neighborhood capable of sending data toward the BS. Accordingly, a super node with
                       a good amount of energy is considered unavailable if the BS is out of its transmission range
                       and there is no other nearby super node to catch its data and forward it. The number of
                       available super nodes is an important factor. This is due to a higher number of available
                       super nodes improves area coverage, enabling the network to fulfill its primary goal of
                       data delivery to the BS more efficiently.
                            Figure 12 reports the number of available super nodes in each round. As shown in this
                       figure, the proposed method consistently demonstrates a higher number of available super
                       nodes compared to competitive algorithms in all rounds for all networks. In WSN 1 , the
                       proposed method shows improvements of 5 super nodes over HEDHMG, 16 super nodes
                       over EFCRPSO, 21 super nodes over EFEBPSO, and 35 super nodes over CRCGA, after
                       1800 time slices. In WSN 2 , the improvements are 5 super nodes over HEDHMG, 15 super
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                                 24 of 28



                       nodes over EFCRPSO, 26 super nodes over EFEBPSO, and 28 super nodes over CRCGA,
                       after 1800 time slices. In WSN 3 , the proposed method shows improvements of 23 super
                       nodes over HEDHMG, 32 super nodes over EFCRPSO, 44 super nodes over EFEBPSO, and
                       40 super nodes over CRCGA, after 1200 time slices. Additionally, CRCGA has the worst
                       performance. In WSN 1 , in round 1800, it has 25, 18, 9, 4 less super nodes compared to the
                       proposed method, HEDHMG, EFCRPSO, and EFEBPSO. The numbers are 29, 23, 13, 2, in
                       WSN 2 , and 47, 17, 8, and 4, in WSN 3 .




                      (a)                                                              (b)




                                                      (c)

                       Figure 12. Number of available super nodes comparison: (a) WSN 1 ; (b) WSN 2 ; (c) WSN 3 .

                             The main factor in achieving a higher number of alive super nodes of our algorithm
                       regarding the competitive schemes is the even distribution of awake nodes. The proposed
                       initialization scheme, customized operators, and f actor1 in the first phase, ensures an
                       even distribution of awake super nodes throughout the network. This evenness reduces
                       the chances of energy depletion in localized areas and promotes better coverage, which
                       increases the likelihood of data being successfully forwarded to the BS. The other factors
                       used in cost1 and cost2 also play a significant role in achieved results. The f actor2 prioritizes
                       super nodes for more energy for tree construction, increasing the chances of sustaining more
                       alive super nodes, contributing to their availability. The third factor, f actor3 , used in the
                       clustering, focuses on evenly distributing normal nodes among super nodes. This balance
                       prevents individual super nodes from becoming overloaded, allowing them to remain
                       operational and available for data forwarding. The application of customized initialization
                       and GA operators in the first phase for balancing the distribution of super nodes throughout
                       the HWSN increases the number of available super nodes. Additionally, CRCGA, while
                       effective in some clustering tasks, shows lower availability because it does not explicitly
                       ensure an even distribution of awake super nodes or consider energy balancing during
                       cluster formation and tree construction.
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                            25 of 28



                      5.5. Time Complexity
                            An important factor in data-gathering algorithms is their time complexity. For practical
                      applicability, an effective algorithm should maintain low time complexity. Table 5 compares
                      the time complexity of the proposed method with the other algorithms. The results show
                      that the proposed scheme achieves better runtime than the others.

                      Table 5. Comparison of time complexity (in seconds).

                                         Proposed
                         Network                        HEDHMG           EFEBPSO        EFCRPSO          CRCGA
                                          Method
                          WSN 1              12.1           12.8             22.9          23.1            14.1
                          WSN 2              14.3           15.9             27.1          27.9            16.8
                          WSN 3              20.6           22.7             39.9          41.1             23


                      6. Conclusions and Future Works
                            This paper proposed an algorithm for efficient sleep scheduling and data gathering
                      in HWSNs. The algorithm consisted of two main phases, each utilizing a GA to optimize
                      network performance. In the first phase, sleep scheduling and tree construction were
                      handled simultaneously, considering their high dependency. Clustering of normal nodes
                      using the awake super nodes as CHs was performed in the second phase. The objectives
                      of these phases focused on energy efficiency and preserving network coverage. The
                      first objective maximized normal node coverage by selecting proper awake super nodes,
                      ensuring each normal node had an awake super node within its neighborhood. The second
                      objective prioritized energy efficiency by balancing remaining energy of super nodes,
                      encouraging routes that have nodes with higher energy levels, prolonging network lifetime.
                      This energy-centric prioritization was also applied in the clustering phase, where normal
                      nodes were evenly distributed among the awake super nodes to prevent overloading and
                      balance energy use. The other advantage of our algorithm was proposing customized
                      initialization scheme, and crossover and mutation operators in its first phase. These
                      schemes aimed at even distribution of awake super nodes. For this purpose, the HWSN
                      was divided into rings, and the initialization method and GA operators tried to adopt equal
                      number of awake super nodes in these rings.
                            For the future work, we aim to explore other energy saving techniques, such as dy-
                      namic modulation scaling. Furthermore, we will examine other meta-heuristic algorithms
                      to attain better network configurations. Swarm intelligence algorithms, such as GWO, have
                      been shown to generate high-quality solutions. Therefore, combining these methods with
                      GA can improve performance. In addition, using normal nodes as CH increases flexibly,
                      improving energy efficiency. This idea, however, considerably expands the solution space
                      and increases complexity, making it difficult to converge to an optimal solution. Therefore,
                      we aim to propose an approach with acceptable time complexity to use normal nodes as
                      CHs. Finally, we will investigate security aspects in HWSNs. Different security issues, such
                      as trust-aware routing and mitigating attacks, have been widely studied in homogeneous
                      WSNs. However, they have not been considered carefully in HWSNs. Additionally, using
                      forecasting techniques [40] can help identify suspect nodes in event-based data gathering
                      in HWSNs.

                      Author Contributions: Conceptualization, S.A.A. and L.F.; methodology, S.A.A., L.F. and M.Z.;
                      supervision, L.F. and M.Z.; validation, L.F. and M.Z.; software, S.A.A.; writing—original draft
                      preparation, S.A.A. and L.F.; writing—review and editing, S.A.A., L.F. and M.Z. All authors have
                      read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.

                      Funding: This research received no external funding.
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                                             26 of 28



                                  Data Availability Statement: Research described in the article did not use any data.

                                  Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

                                  Abbreviations
                                  The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:

                                  ABC           Artificial Bee Colony
                                  ACO           Ant Colony Optimization
                                  BES           Bald Eagle Search
                                  BHHO          Binary Horse Herd Optimization
                                  BS            Base Station
                                  CH            Cluster Head
                                  CM            Cluster Member
                                  CRCGA         Clustering Routing protocol using a Chaotic Genetic Algorithm
                                  DL            Deep Learning
                                  EFCRPSO       Energy Efficient Clustering and Routing algorithms for WSNs using PSO
                                  EFEBPSO       Energy Efficient and Energy-Balanced routing and clustering in WSNs using PSO
                                  FND           First Node Die
                                  GA            Genetic Algorithm
                                  GWO           Gray Wolf Optimization
                                                High-throughput and Energy-efficient Data gathering in Heterogeneous Multi-
                                  HEDHMG
                                                channel WSNs using GA
                                  HWSN          Heterogeneous Wireless Sensor Network
                                  LND           Last Node Die
                                  MAC           Medium Access Control
                                  PSO           Particle Swarm Optimization
                                  RL            Reinforcement Learning
                                  RWS           Roulette Wheel Selection
                                  TDMA          Time Division Multiple Access
                                  TPC           Transmission Power Control
                                  TPO           Taylor-Political Optimizer
                                  WSN           Wireless Sensor Networks

References
1.    Sharma, D.; Ojha, A.; Bhondekar, A.P. Heterogeneity consideration in wireless sensor networks routing algorithms: A review.
      J. Supercomput. 2019, 75, 2341–2394. [CrossRef]
2.    Tanwar, S.; Kumar, N.; Rodrigues, J.J. A systematic review on heterogeneous routing protocols for wireless sensor network.
      J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2015, 53, 39–56. [CrossRef]
3.    MeenaKowshalya, A.; Sukanya, A. Clustering algorithms for heterogenous wireless sensor networks—A brief survey. Int. J. Ad
      hoc Sens. Ubiquitous Comput. 2011, 2. Available online: https://aircconline.com/ijasuc/V2N3/2311ijasuc04.pdf (accessed on 27
      August 2025).
4.    Azharuddin, M.; Jana, P.K. PSO-based approach for energy-efficient and energy-balanced routing and clustering in wireless
      sensor networks. Soft Comput. 2017, 21, 6825–6839. [CrossRef]
5.    Shahryari, M.-S.; Farzinvash, L.; Feizi-Derakhshi, M.R.; Taherkordi, A. High-throughput and energy-efficient data gathering in
      heterogeneous multi-channel wireless sensor networks using genetic algorithm. Ad Hoc Netw. 2023, 139, 103041. [CrossRef]
6.    Pal, R.; Saraswat, M.; Kumar, S.; Nayyar, A.; Rajput, P.K. Energy efficient multi-criterion binary grey wolf optimizer based
      clustering for heterogeneous wireless sensor networks. Soft Comput. 2024, 28, 3251–3265. [CrossRef]
7.    Mughal, F.R.; He, J.; Zhu, N.; Almutiq, M.; Dharejo, F.A.; Jain, D.K.; Hussain, S.; Zardari, Z.A. An intelligent hybrid-Q learning
      clustering approach and resource management within heterogeneous cluster networks based on reinforcement learning. Trans.
      Emerg. Telecommun. 2024, 35, e4852. [CrossRef]
8.    Bhanu, D.; Santhosh, R. Heterogeneous wireless sensor network design with optimal energy conservation and security through
      efficient routing algorithm. J. Cybersecur. Inf. Manag. 2024, 13, 140–154. [CrossRef]
9.    Thangavelu, A.; Rajendran, P. Energy-efficient secure routing for a sustainable heterogeneous IoT network management.
      Sustainability 2024, 16, 4756. [CrossRef]
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                                                27 of 28



10.   Kuila, P.; Jana, P.K. Energy efficient clustering and routing algorithms for wireless sensor networks: Particle swarm optimization
      approach. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2014, 33, 127–140. [CrossRef]
11.   Shahryari, M.-S.; Farzinvash, L.; Feizi-Derakhshi, M.R. Cost-efficient network design in multichannel WSNs with power control:
      A grey wolf optimization approach to routing and clustering. Int. J. Distrib. Sens. Netw. 2024, 2024, 1357195. [CrossRef]
12.   Wang, C.; Liu, X.; Hu, H.; Han, Y.; Yao, M. Energy-efficient and load-balanced clustering routing protocol for wireless sensor
      networks using a chaotic genetic algorithm. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 158082–158096. [CrossRef]
13.   Alwasel, B.; Salim, A.; Khedr, A.M.; Osamy, W. Dominating sets-based approach for maximizing lifetime of IoT-based heteroge-
      neous WSNs enabled sustainable smart city applications. IEEE Access 2024, 12, 44069–44079. [CrossRef]
14.   Alasadi, H.S.; Farzinvash, L.; Feizi-Derakhshi, M.R.; Mortazavi, S.A. Enhancing data collection in heterogenous wireless sensor
      networks: A novel tree-structured genetic algorithm approach. IEEE Access 2024, 12, 173020–173036. [CrossRef]
15.   Niyato, D.; Hossain, E.; Fallahi, A. Sleep and wakeup strategies in solar-powered wireless sensor/mesh networks: Performance
      analysis and optimization. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. 2007, 6, 221–236. [CrossRef]
16.   Wang, X.; Chen, H.; Li, S. A reinforcement learning-based sleep scheduling algorithm for compressive data gathering in wireless
      sensor networks. EURASIP J. Wirel. Commun. Netw. 2023, 2023, 28. [CrossRef]
17.   Mohammadi, R.; Shirmohammadi, Z. RLS2: An energy efficient reinforcement learning-based sleep scheduling for energy
      harvesting WBANs. Comput. Netw. 2023, 229, 109781. [CrossRef]
18.   Bourebia, N.E.H.; Bourebia, S. RMIS: An independent vertex set based sleep scheduling protocol for network lifetime maximiza-
      tion in WSNs. Wirel. Netw. 2025, 31, 3843–3864. [CrossRef]
19.   Bertanha, M.; Pazzi, R.W.; El-Khatib, K. ECKN: An integrated approach for position estimation, packet routing, and sleep
      scheduling in wireless sensor networks. Sensors 2023, 23, 6133. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
20.   Sangaiah, A.K.; Javadpour, A.; Ja’fari, F.; Zavieh, H.; Khaniabadi, S.M. SALA-IoT: Self-reduced internet of things with learning
      automaton sleep scheduling algorithm. IEEE Sens. J. 2023, 23, 20737–20744. [CrossRef]
21.   El-Shenhabi, A.N.; Abdelhay, E.H.; Mohamed, M.A.; Moawad, I.F. A reinforcement learning-based dynamic clustering of sleep
      scheduling algorithm (RLDCSSA-CDG) for compressive data gathering in wireless sensor networks. Technologies 2025, 13, 25.
      [CrossRef]
22.   Wang, L.; Zhang, G.; Li, J.; Lin, G. Joint optimization of power control and time slot allocation for wireless body area networks via
      deep reinforcement learning. Wirel. Netw. 2020, 26, 4507–4516. [CrossRef]
23.   Rawat, P.; Rawat, G.S.; Rawat, H.; Chauhan, S. Energy-efficient cluster-based routing protocol for heterogeneous wireless sensor
      network. Ann. Telecommun. 2025, 80, 109–122. [CrossRef]
24.   Bhasker, B.; Murali, S. An energy-efficient cluster-based data aggregation for agriculture irrigation management system using
      wireless sensor networks. Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess. 2024, 65, 103771. [CrossRef]
25.   Sudha, M.; Chandrakala, D.; Sreethar, S.; Shrivindhya, A. Energy efficient spiking deep residual network and binary horse herd
      optimization espoused clustering protocol for wireless sensor networks. Appl. Soft Comput. 2024, 157, 111456. [CrossRef]
26.   Gupta, N.; Hamid, A.B.A.; Mahat, A.B.B.; Kumar, A. Analysis of energy-efficient smart path optimization routing protocol for
      wireless sensor networks. Results Eng. 2025, 28, 107456. [CrossRef]
27.   Chaurasia, S.; Kumar, K.; Kamboj, A.K. EHRP-WSN: Energy-efficient hyperheuristic routing protocol for wireless sensor networks.
      AEU-Int. J. Electron. Commun. 2025, 202, 156044. [CrossRef]
28.   Satheesh Kumar, D.; Satheesh Kumar, N.; Divya, R.; Sampath Kumar, S. Grey wolf optimizer with softmax-regressed and tanimoto
      reweight for AI-ML-based wireless sensor network routing. Peer-to-Peer Netw. Appl. 2025, 18, 107. [CrossRef]
29.   Jia, R.; Zhang, H. Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) model targeting energy efficient wireless sensor networks node coverage.
      IEEE Access 2024, 12, 27596–27610. [CrossRef]
30.   Saadati, M.; Mazinani, S.M.; Khazaei, A.A.; Chabok, S.J.S.M. Energy efficient clustering for dense wireless sensor network by
      applying graph neural networks with coverage metrics. Ad Hoc Netw. 2024, 156, 103432. [CrossRef]
31.   Chouhan, N.; Kumar, A.; Kumar, N. Taylor political optimizer-based cluster head selection in IOT-assisted WSN networks. Int. J.
      Commun. Syst. 2024, 37, e5733. [CrossRef]
32.   Asiedu, D.K.P.; Lee, K.-J.; Yun, J.-H. Energy-efficient routing, power control and energy clustering for energy harvesting-enabled
      spectrum sharing IoT sensor networks. Internet Things 2024, 25, 101122. [CrossRef]
33.   Batra, P.K.; Vamsi, P.R. Fuzzy logic-based cluster head selection method for enhancing wireless sensor network lifetime. Int. J.
      Perform. Eng. 2024, 20, 81–90. [CrossRef]
34.   Kaviarasan, S.; Srinivasan, R. Developing a novel energy efficient routing protocol in WSN using adaptive remora optimization
      algorithm. Expert Syst. Appl. 2024, 244, 122873. [CrossRef]
35.   Vincent, S.S.M.; Duraipandian, N. Detection and prevention of sinkhole attacks in MANETS based routing protocol using hybrid
      adaboost-random forest algorithm. Expert Syst. Appl. 2024, 249, 123765. [CrossRef]
36.   Shahid, M.; Tariq, M.; Iqbal, Z.; Albarakati, H.M.; Fatima, N.; Khan, M.A. Link-quality based energy-efficient routing protocol for
      WSN in IoT. IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. 2024, 70, 4645–4653. [CrossRef]
Network 2025, 5, 50                                                                                                                28 of 28



37.   Shafique, T.; Soliman, A.-H.; Amjad, A.; Uden, L.; Roberts, D.M. Node role selection and rotation scheme for energy efficiency in
      multi-level IoT-based Heterogeneous Wireless Sensor Networks (HWSNs). Sensors 2024, 24, 5642. [CrossRef]
38.   Heinzelman, W.B.; Chandrakasan, A.P.; Balakrishnan, H. An application-specific protocol architecture for wireless microsensor
      networks. IEEE Trans. Wirel. Commun. 2002, 1, 660–670. [CrossRef]
39.   Gunjan. A review on unequal clustering protocols in wireless sensor networks. Wirel. Pers. Commun. 2024, 139, 1693–1707.
      [CrossRef]
40.   Hong, S.; Yue, T.; You, Y.; Lv, Z.; Tang, X.; Hu, J.; Yin, H. A resilience recovery method for complex traffic network security based
      on trend forecasting. Int. J. Intell. Syst. 2025, 1, 3715086. [CrossRef]


Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.
